121.1 Applicability
according to RBAC No. 119, which uses airplanes with maximum certified seating configuration for
passengers with more than 19 seats or a maximum payload capacity over 3,400 kg; (Essay
given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
under this regulation, including maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs of
aircraft;
Advanced Qualification or curriculum segment under this regulation, and each person employed
by an airline under this regulation to perform training, qualification or
assessments under an Advanced Qualification Program;
operational evaluation. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
continued airworthiness of each aircraft.
<EOS>
121.2 [Reserved] (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121.3 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121.4 Applicability of the rules for unauthorized operators
The rules of this regulation that refer to a person certified according to RBAC 119 apply
also, to any person who engages in operations governed by this regulation without the
appropriate certificate and operating specifications required by RBAC 119.
<EOS>
121.7 Definitions
The following definitions apply to sections of RBAC 121 that deal with ETOPS operations:
certificate holder, approved by ANAC, which meets the landing limitations of section 121.197
and also:
where an airplane can land after experiencing an engine stop or other abnormal condition or
emergency that occurs en route during an ETOPS operation;
Adequate Aerodrome, considering the cruising speed with an inoperative engine under
standard atmosphere and calm air;
Adequate Aerodrome, considering the cruising speed with an inoperative engine under
standard atmosphere and calm air;
considering cruising speed with an inoperative engine under standard atmosphere and calm air
and:
engines;
certificate holder, has successfully completed the ETOPS training program for the
certificate holder;
authorized deviation time for a calculated certificate holder ETOPS operation
considering cruising speed with an inoperative engine under standard atmosphere and calm air;
operation, certified for the aircraft, specified by the certificate holder and approved by the
ANAC for:
maximum authorized deviation for an ETOPS flight.
<EOS>
121.11 Rules applicable to operations in foreign countries
Each certificate holder must, while operating an airplane in a foreign country, maintain
compliance with the air traffic rules of the country concerned and the local rules of the
aerodromes, except when a rule in this regulation is more restrictive and can be followed without
violate that country's rules.
<EOS>
121.15 Transport of narcotic drugs, marijuana and other drugs or depressive substances
or stimulants
If a certificate holder, operating under this regulation, allows an airplane of his or her
owned or leased by him is engaged in any operation that he, the certificate holder,
knows to be in violation of paragraph 91.19 (a) of RBHA 91, or the regulation that will replace it,
such an operation can serve as a basis for suspension or revocation of the certificate. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
SUBPART B
SUBPART C
SUBPART D
SUBPART E
APPROVAL OF ROUTES FOR REGULAR OPERATIONS (Title of Subpart with
wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121.91 Applicability
This subpart establishes rules for obtaining route approval by certificate holders
conducting regular operations.
<EOS>
121.93 Route requirements. General
route must demonstrate:
regular, or refueling, along that route or route segment; and
appropriate to the intended operations.
ANAC may approve a route outside controlled airspace, provided that it considers that the
traffic density is such that an adequate level of security can be ensured.
route segment if the certificate holder demonstrates that such a flight is not essential to safety,
considering the availability and suitability of aerodromes, in particular as regards signaling and
lighting aids, aircraft maintenance, refueling, communications, navigation aids
of the ground and the plane and the proficiency of the personnel involved in the intended operations.
<EOS>
121.95 Route width
Routes and route segments approved entirely within Brazilian or foreign airways (and in
advisory routes in the case of certificate holders conducting international operations) have
the width regulated by a specific rule of the Air Force Command. (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121.97 Aerodromes. Required information
submitted for approval is supported by aerodromes in adequate quantity and quality, considering
aspects such as dimensions, resistance and surface of the tracks, obstructions, facilities, protection to the
(security), signaling and lighting aids, navigation and approach aids,
communication, opening hours and traffic control. (Wording given by Resolution No. 526,
of 06.08.2019)
approved system to collect, update and disseminate to appropriate personnel information
aeronautics valid for each aerodrome used by it, in order to guarantee the safety of
operations on them. Aeronautical information must include the following: (Wording provided by the
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
regulation;
aeronautical information approved for a certificate holder should be changed to meet
circumstances, the holder will be notified in writing and must implement the changes
required. Within 30 days of receiving the notification, the certificate holder may request
reconsideration of the ANAC decision. The presentation of an appeal leaves the deadline for
compliance with the amendment until ANAC's decision on the matter. However, if it is considered that
there is an emergency situation requiring immediate action in the interest of transport security
air transport, ANAC can determine, justifying its decision, a modification with effectiveness
immediate.
<EOS>
121.99 Communications facilities
your routes (directly or via point-to-point circuit) there is a reliable and fast system of
bilateral plane-to-ground communications that, under normal operating conditions, ensure radio contact
of each plane with the appropriate dispatch center and between each plane and the appropriate radio station
air traffic control, except as specified in 121,351 (c). (Wording given by Resolution
nº 526, of 08.06.2019)
independent of any system operated by DECEA.
voice communication, for ETOPS operations, where these facilities are available. For
determine if these facilities are available, the certificate holder should consider the routes
and potential diversion altitudes for alternative aerodromes on the ETOPS route. Where are you
facilities are not available or are of such low quality that voice communication
not possible, another communication system must be made available. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
it must have an additional communication system, in addition to that required by paragraph (c) of this section.
This system must provide voice communication via satellite with the same fidelity as a system
terrestrial telephone, in addition it must be able to provide communications between the crew and the services
air traffic control and between the crew and the certificate holder. To determine the
availability of these communications, the certificate holder should consider routes and altitudes
potentials required in the event of detours to the alternative aerodromes on the ETOPS route. If the
satellite communication system is not available or is of poor quality another system
communications should be made available.
<EOS>
121,101 Weather information services
of each route there are sufficient meteorological information services to ensure a
minimum data and meteorological forecasts required for the operation.
Regular operations should use meteorological information so that:
prepared by the Air Force Command or by agencies approved by it; or
organs and agencies approved by the country overflown.
meteorological data prepared from the meteorological information specified in paragraph (b)
this section or from information from a source approved under paragraph (d) of this
section.
an approved system for obtaining and disclosing to its staff predictions and information about phenomena
adverse atmospheric conditions, such as turbulence in clear skies, storms and wind shears in
low altitudes, which may affect flight safety on each route to be flown and each aerodrome to be
be used.
<EOS>
121,103 Route navigation facilities
regular operations must demonstrate that on each of the proposed routes ground aid does not
visual are: (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
required by air traffic control; and
alternatively, within the degree of precision required by the operation involved. With the exception of aid
required on routes to alternative aerodromes, all non-visual ground aids
required for approved routes outside controlled airspace will be listed in the specifications
of the certificate holder.
safely by navigation by contact with the characteristics of the terrain;
references on the ground that are well lit, reliable and suitable for safe operation; and
specialized autonomous navigation is approved by the aeronautical authorities.
<EOS>
121.105 Ramp service and maintenance facilities
Each certificate holder conducting regular operations must demonstrate that personnel
competent and appropriate facilities and equipment (including spare parts, supplies and
materials) are available at specific aerodromes along each of its routes, in accordance with
needs, in order to provide adequate ground care, maintenance and
preventive maintenance of airplanes and auxiliary equipment.
<EOS>
121,106 Alternative aerodrome on ETOPS route: prevention, rescue and
fire fighting
rescue and fire fighting must be available at each alternate aerodrome en route
ETOPS listed in an order or flight plan:
the service described in paragraph (a) of this section equivalent to that specified by ICAO as a category
4 or higher;
must have the service described in paragraph (a) of this section equivalent to that specified by ICAO
as category 4 or higher. Additionally, the aircraft must remain within the authorization of
diversion ETOPS from a suitable aerodrome that has a rescue and fire-fighting service
equivalent to that specified by ICAO as category 7 or higher.
immediately available at the aerodrome, the certificate holder will still be able to list it in
your dispatch or flight plan if it can count on the help of local forces to combat
fires. A response time of 30 minutes for the availability of assistance from local forces is
appropriate, if these forces can be notified while the aircraft is diverting to the
aerodrome. Local fire-fighting forces must remain as long as the aircraft
need such services.
<EOS>
121,107 Flight Dispatch Centers
Each certificate holder conducting regular operations must demonstrate that he has training centers
flight dispatch in sufficient numbers to attend the operations to be conducted and that such
centers are located at the points necessary for the operational control of each flight.
SUBPART F
APPROVAL OF ROUTES AND AREAS FOR NON-REGULAR OPERATIONS (Title of
Subpart with wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,111 Applicability
This subpart establishes rules for obtaining approval of routes and areas of operation for
certificate holders conducting non-regular operations.
<EOS>
121,113 Requirements for routes and areas. General
and routes must demonstrate: (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
paragraphs (a) (3) and (4) of this section;
outside Brazil for which authorization is requested;
Brazilian airlines, foreign airways and advisory routes (ADR's) to be flown, using the
navigation and communication facilities associated with them; and
foreign airways, controlled airspace or on advisory routes (ADR's).
controlled if the certificate holder conducting non-regular operations demonstrates that the route is
safe for the operation and ANAC considers that the traffic density is such that an adequate level
security can be ensured. The certificate holder cannot use such routes unless they are
approved by ANAC and listed in the certificate holder's operating specifications. (Essay
given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,114 Minimum flight altitudes
for the routes it operates as long as they are not inferior to those established by Brazil or the United States
overflown, unless they have been expressly approved.
flight, the certificate holder shall specify the method employed for such calculation. The altitudes
flight requirements determined by the aforementioned method must not be less than those specified in the Annex
2 of the International Civil Aviation Convention.
approved by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,115 Route width
Routes and segments of approved routes of Brazilian or foreign airways have the width
provided for in the relevant letters and publications of the Air Force Command.
<EOS>
121,117 Aerodromes. Required information
unless it is registered and appropriately equipped and suitable for the proposed operation,
considering aspects such as dimensions, surface of the tracks, obstructions, facilities, protection to the
public, lighting, navigation and approach aids, communication, opening hours and
ATC. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
an approved system for collecting, updating and disseminating to appropriate personnel information
aeronautics valid for each aerodrome used by it, in order to guarantee the safety of
operations at these aerodromes. Aeronautical information must include: (Wording provided by the
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
regulation;
aeronautical information approved for a certificate holder should be changed to meet
circumstances, the holder will be notified in writing and must implement the changes
required. Within 30 days of receiving the notification, the certificate holder may request
reconsideration of the ANAC decision. The presentation of an appeal leaves the deadline for
compliance with the amendment until ANAC's decision on the matter. However, if it is considered that
there is an emergency situation requiring immediate action in the interest of transport security
air transport, ANAC can determine, justifying its decision, a modification with effectiveness
immediate.
<EOS>
121,119 Weather information services
weather information to conduct your flights, unless such information has been provided
prepared by the Air Force Command or another agency recognized by the same. For operations
outside Brazil, the certificate holder must demonstrate that the information and forecasts
available meteorological data are prepared by sources considered satisfactory by ANAC.
meteorological conditions to guide flight movements should use forecasts prepared from the
meteorological information specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
<EOS>
121.121 Route navigation facilities
non-regular operations can conduct any operation along a route, unless the
non-visual ground aids are: (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
required by the ATC; and
refueling or alternative, within the degree of precision required by the operation involved.
safely by navigation by contact with the characteristics of the terrain;
references on the ground that are well lit, reliable and suitable for safe operation; and
specialized autonomous navigation is approved by the aeronautical authorities.
Non-visual ground aids required for routes approved outside controlled airspace will be
listed in the certificate holder's operating specifications.
<EOS>
121.122 Communication facilities: non-regular operations
freighters on airplanes with more than two engines must demonstrate that it has a
two-way radio communication or other means of communication approved by ANAC. This system
must ensure immediate and reliable communications along the entire route (direct or point-to-point circuit)
between each airplane and the certificate holder and this and the appropriate ATC service, except as
specified in section 121.351 (c).
cargo operations, with airplanes with more than two engines must have a communication system
by voice, for ETOPS, where this facility is available. To determine the availability of these
communications, the certificate holder should consider potential routes and necessary altitudes in the
deviations for the alternative ETOPS aerodromes. Where this facility is not
available or of low quality, another communications system should be made available.
aircraft with more than two engines must have an additional communication system, in addition to
required by paragraph (b) of this section. This system must provide voice communication via
satellite with the same fidelity as a terrestrial telephone system, in addition it must be able to provide
communications between the crew and air traffic control services and between the crew and the
certificate holder. To determine the availability of these communications, the holder of the
The certificate must consider potential routes and necessary altitudes in the event of deviations to the
alternative ETOPS aerodromes. If the satellite communication system is not available
or is of poor quality, another communications system must be made available.
<EOS>
121.123 Service facilities and ramp services
Each certificate holder conducting non-regular operations must demonstrate that he has
competent personnel and appropriate facilities and equipment (including spare parts,
supplies and materials) in order to ensure appropriate ground handling services, maintenance
and preventive maintenance to planes and auxiliary equipment. (Wording given by Resolution No. 526,
of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,125 Flight tracking system
has: (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
U of this regulation, which is appropriate for the monitoring of each flight, considering the
operations to be conducted; and
their departure from the point of origin and their arrival at the point of destination, including intermediate landings,
deviations to alternatives and delays due to mechanical or maintenance problems that may occur
in those places; and
flight safety.
tracking flights operated by third parties. However, primary responsibility for
Operational control of each flight cannot be delegated to anyone. (Wording given by Resolution
nº 526, of 08.06.2019)
accompaniment during the flight.
authorized flight, as well as the location of the control centers.
<EOS>
121,127 Flight tracking system. Requirements
Flight monitoring must demonstrate that: (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
the start and safe continuation of each flight to:
of the flight; and
adequate to monitor the progress of each flight with respect to its takeoff from the
aerodrome of origin and its landing at the destination aerodrome, including intermediate landings and
alternative landings, as well as possible delays due to mechanical or maintenance problems
occurred at those points.
personnel specified in paragraph (a) of this section and those designated for operational control
aircraft are qualified to perform their duties. (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
SUBPART G
MANUALS SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
<EOS>
121,131 Applicability
This subpart establishes requirements for the elaboration and updating of the manual system for all
certificate holders.
<EOS>
121.133 Elaboration of the manual system
manuals for the use and guidance of its ground and flight personnel in the conduct of their activities.
prior acceptance by ANAC, except those exempted from this act by the manual already accepted.
system of manuals containing instructions and maintenance information, in whole or in part, under the
printed form or other forms acceptable to ANAC.
<EOS>
121.135 Contents of the manual system
each person fulfills his / her duties and responsibilities with a high degree of security;
no applicable foreign legislation. Do not contradict, yet, what is contained in the COA and respective
operating specifications. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
original publications by aircraft and component manufacturers, provided that the package contains all
the information below, with each volume containing all the information concerning each
specific group of people:
approved normal, abnormal and emergency procedures and procedures, as provided for in its
operational training, which includes those aimed at avoiding low wind shears
altitude and CFIT - Controlled Flight into Terrain.
organization of ground and management personnel;
flight dispatches and operational control or flight tracking procedures, such as
applicable;
dispatch or flight continuation if any item of equipment, required for a particular type of
operation, become inoperable or unusable en route, additionally:
operating specifications, including, for each approved route, the types of aircraft authorized to fly
la, the type of operation approved as VFR, IFR, day, night, etc. for the same and any other
pertinent information, additionally: (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
operating areas, including the authorized operating area, the types of aircraft allowed, the types of
approved operations such as VFR, IFR, day, night, etc. and any other pertinent information,
additionally: (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
of 06.08.2019)
only); (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
landing;
during flight;
the dissemination of information relevant to operations personnel;
potentially dangerous atmospheric conditions;
ground, flight and emergency;
ramp;
inspections and checks of cells, power units and normal and
emergency;
fuel, fire prevention (including electrostatic protection) and passenger protection
during refueling;
airworthiness;
approved limits;
on routes and aerodromes;
specific to the Aeronautical Accident Prevention and Investigation System (SIPAER);
a plan was drawn up for passengers to continue their journey; (Wording given by Resolution nº
526, of 06.06.2019)
Subpart Z, including actions to be taken in case of emergency; (Wording given by Resolution
nº 608, of 02.11.2021)
Note: guidance on developing policies and procedures for dealing with
occurrences with dangerous articles on board aircraft are specified in a specific standard of the
ANAC. (Included by Resolution No. 608, of 11.02.2021)
given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
flight operations guidelines for operations, at all stages of flight, in a safe manner,
efficient, logical and predictable;
meteorological and observations on route, uphill and at other stages of the flight (AIREP);
phenomena related to volcanic activities.
and equipment, as provided for in paragraph (b) of this section, if:
demonstrate that the personnel to whom the copies will be distributed in accordance with paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of
section 121.137 of this regulation, is able to read and understand, perfectly, the instructions in them
contained.
main operating area.
certificate that are not specifically required in other sections of this regulation, with a view to
complete the set of information required by Appendix 2, Part I of Annex 6 to the Convention
from Chicago.
<EOS>
121.137 Availability and distribution of the manual system
required by 121,133 (and respective amendments and / or addenda) or appropriate parts
of the same for:
in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section it must keep you updated with the changes and addenda to it
provided and must keep the appropriate manual system or volumes in an accessible place when
performing the tasks assigned to it.
part of the manual system for maintenance in printed or other approved form
by ANAC that allows retrieving the information.
You may choose to keep copies of the manual system (or parts thereof) on board your aircraft.
applicable) updated and in a quantity appropriate to the number and types of crew on board.
The positioning and quantity of these manual systems (or applicable parts of them) in the
passenger cabin of each type of airplane and for each internal configuration of that cabin (if
applicable) must be approved by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,139 Requirements for manual on board aircraft. Non-regular operations
non-regular operations must transport all or appropriate parts of its manual system
on each of its planes that are outside the operational headquarters. Such parts must be available
for use by flight and ground personnel. If any portion of the maintenance part is under
other than the printed form, the airplane must also carry a device for reading the
that provides a clearly legible image of the information and instructions for maintenance or
a system that allows retrieving such information.
scheduled maintenance in specific locations, where it maintains the maintenance parts of the
manual, there will be no need to have such parts on board when the aircraft is heading for
such locations.
<EOS>
121,141 Aircraft flight manual
Airplane Operations (AOM) updated for each type of airplane it operates, except for non-aircraft types
transport category certificates before January 1, 1965.
certificate can carry on board both the manual required by 121.133, if it contains the information
required by the applicable flight manual and such information is clearly identified as
requirements of the AFM, or an Airplane Operations Manual (AOM). If the certificate holder chooses
by carrying the manual required by 121.133 on board, he can review the sections of the procedures
and modify the presentation of the performance data contained in the AFM if such
modifications are:
SUBPART H
AIRCRAFT REQUIREMENTS
<EOS>
121,151 Applicability
This subpart establishes requirements for airplanes for all certificate holders
<EOS>
121,153 Aircraft requirements: general
an airplane, unless such an airplane:
valid airworthiness certificate, issued in accordance with the applicable RBAC; and
applicable, including those related to identification and equipment.
a certificate holder can use an approved method for weight control and balancing
of their planes, based on average weight, assumed or estimated.
minimum, an airplane that meets the requirements of paragraph 121.157 (b) of this regulation “Use
exclusive ”means having possession, control and use of the aircraft through cash or installment purchase
registered with the RAB or through a lease agreement under the terms of paragraph (d) of this
section.
he leased if:
Brazilian Aeronautical Registry;
physical or legal), subject to ANAC approval.
provided for in RBAC 21;
equivalent regulation of the country of origin and accepted by ANAC, except that it must comply with the
provisions of section 121.317 of these regulations;
by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,155 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,157 Aircraft certification requirements
certificate can operate an airplane that received a type certificate before July 1,
1942, unless:
certificates meet the performance requirements of sections 4a.737-T through 4a.750-T of the “Civil
Air Regulation ”, of the United States of America, effective January 31, 1965 or sections
25.45 to 25.75 of RBAC 25 and 121.173 (a), (b), (d) and (e) of this regulation.
in paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section, no certificate holder may operate an airplane
which received a type certificate after June 30, 1942, unless such an aircraft has been
certified in the transport category and meets the requirements of 121,173 (a), (b), (d) and (e).
carrying passengers, unless that aircraft is operated in accordance with the limitations
for transport category airplanes and meets the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section or
meets the requirements of Part 4b of the “Civil Air Regulation”, of the United States of America, effective
as of July 20, 1950 and the requirements of 121,173 (a), (b), (d) and (e), except that:
July 1953, must be met; and
answered.
In determining the takeoff trajectory according to section 4b.116 and the climb with a
engine inoperative according to section 4b.120 (a) and (b), it can be assumed that the engine propeller
inoperative is flagged if the airplane is equipped with an approved means of indicating,
automatically, the failure of a particular engine or with an approved means to automatically
flag the engine propeller inoperative. ANAC may authorize deviations from conformity with the
sections 4b.130 to 4b.190 and with Part 4b subparts C, D, E and F (as designated in this paragraph)
if it is considered that (considering the effect of changes in the design) compliance is
extremely difficult to achieve and the experience in service with C-46 aircraft justifies the
deviations.
type C-46, not included in the transport category, in cargo operations, unless it:
performance of Appendix I of this regulation;
regulation, when certified for maximum gross take-off weight greater than 45,000 lb; and
up to 121,287 or Appendix I, all of this regulation.
operate under this regulation an airplane with a certified type certificate issued after 31
December 1964, not included in the transport category.
type was filed after March 29, 1995, unless the airplane type has been certified
according to RBHA 25 or RBAC 25, as applicable.
<EOS>
121,159 Prohibition of operation with single-engine airplanes
No certificate holder may operate single-engine aircraft in operations under this
regulation.
<EOS>
121,161 Aircraft limitations. Route type
authorized in the operating specifications, no certificate holder may operate an airplane with
turbine engines on a route that has a point:
standard conditions and calm air with an inoperative engine) of 75 minutes for a twin-engine aircraft or
180 minutes for an airplane with more than two engines carrying passengers;
be certified or approved, as applicable, for lashing under provisions of RBAC 25.
operation or performance of the airplane to be used, no certificate holder may operate a
conventionally powered aircraft on a route that has a point more than 75 minutes into the flight
Adequate.
<EOS>
121.162 Type approval basis for ETOPS operations
Except in passenger transport operations with airplanes with more than two engines manufactured
before February 17, 2015 and except a two-engine plane is used on ETOPS flights
up to 75 minutes, no certificate holder can conduct ETOPS operations unless the
aircraft type design has been approved for such operations and each aircraft meets its document
CMP, as follows:
ETOPS up to 180 minutes before February 15, 2007, the CMP document for the combination
aircraft engine in effect on February 14, 2007.
ETOPS up to 180 minutes before February 15, 2007, the CMP document for that new
airplane-engine combination issued in accordance with section 25.3 (b) (1) of RBAC 25.
CMP for that airplane-engine combination model issued in accordance with section 25.3 (b) (2) of
RBAC 25.
for that airplane-engine combination model issued in accordance with section 25.3 (c) of the RBAC
25.
<EOS>
121,163 Operational evaluation flights
type of operation previously approved under this regulation or according to RBAC 135, the
unless this aircraft has a minimum of 100 flight hours in addition to certification,
acceptable to ANAC, including a number of representative flights to en route aerodromes. O
The requirement of an additional 100 hours can be reduced by ANAC if it is demonstrated that a
adequate level of proficiency has been reached. At least 10 hours of flight time must be flown at night,
such hours being irreducible. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
for each type of airplane the certificate holder must conduct an operational evaluation flight, acceptable
by ANAC, for the operations it intends to conduct, including a representative number of
flights to airfields en route.
authorized by ANAC, for each type of aircraft that has been materially modified, a
certificate holder must conduct operational evaluation flights acceptable by ANAC to the
operations he intends to conduct with such an airplane, including a representative number of flights to
en route aerodromes.
type of airplane is considered to have had its design materially altered if the modifications
include:
flight.
performing operational assessment flights, except those necessary for the assessment and those
designated by ANAC. In the meantime, you can transport cargo, postal pouches or conduct training
of crews when approved.
SUBPART I
PERFORMANCE OF AIRCRAFT. OPERATIONAL LIMITS
<EOS>
121,171 Applicability
certificate holders.
distance from the point defined by the intersection of the obstacle release plane (associated with
the headland to be used) with the center line of the track until the end of the same track.
plane ") means an inclined plane, rising from the runway with a gradient of 1:20 with the plane
horizontal and tangent, or above, all obstacles within a specific area around the
track, as shown in a profile view of that area. In plan view, the center line of the area
coincides with the center line of the runway, starting at the point defined by the intersection of the
plan for releasing obstacles with the center line of the runway and proceeding to at least one
point 460m (1500 feet) from the start point. After that, that central line coincides with
the projection of the takeoff trajectory on the ground (in the case of takeoff), or with the projection of the
approach trajectory on the ground (in the case of landing) or, if these trajectories are not defined
for the aerodrome, it continues, consistent with curves of at least 1,200 m (4,000 feet) in radius,
until it reaches a point from which the obstacle release plan clears all obstacles. That
area extends laterally 60m (200 feet) to either side of the center line at the point of intersection
of the obstacle release plane with the center line of the runway and remains at this width
while on the track; from the headland, it rises evenly to 150 m (500 ft) to
each side of the central line to a point 460m (1,500 feet) from its beginning; after that, she
it extends laterally 150 m (500 feet) to either side of the center line.
<EOS>
121,173 General
conventionally powered aircraft must meet the requirements of 121,175 through 121,187.
An airplane with turbine or turboprop engines must comply with the applicable provisions of 121,189 up to
121,197, except when it operates:
certified with the same number of conventional engines, when you can choose the requirements of
121,175 to 121,187; or
described in section 121.157 paragraph (f) a certificate holder must comply with the requirements
Appendix K of this regulation.
certified before January 1, 1965, must meet the requirements of 121,199 through 121,205
and any determination of compliance must be based solely on performance data
approved.
determination of compliance with 121,175 through 121,197. Where conditions are different
those on which performance data is based, compliance is determined by
interpolation or computing the effects of changes on specific variables, if the results
interpolation or computation are substantially as accurate as the direct results
of trials.
conventional engines weighing more than the allowable weight for the track being used
this regulation), after taking into account the factors of correction of operating temperatures
of the applicable Airplane Flight Manual (AFM).
if, in extraordinary circumstances, literal compliance with one or more of these requirements does not affect
security of operations. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
for no more than 20 miles away, in VFR operations or when navigation facilities
provide reliable and accurate identification of elevations and obstructions located between 5 and 10
miles for each side of the intended course.
<EOS>
121,175 Airplanes with conventional engines: weight limitations
at an altitude outside the altitude range for which the maximum take-off weights for that airplane
have been determined.
is located at an altitude outside the altitude range for which the maximum landing weights for
that plane were determined.
located at an altitude outside the altitude range for which the maximum landing weights for that
plane were determined.
the maximum authorized take-off weight for the altitude of the aerodrome.
destination aerodrome is greater than the maximum authorized landing weight for the altitude of that
aerodrome, considering the normal consumption of oil and fuel en route.
according to 121.173 (c).
<EOS>
121,177 Airplanes with conventional engines: takeoff limitations
at any time during takeoff until the critical engine failure speed is reached;
critical engine, V1, continue to take off and reach a height of 50 feet, as indicated by the data
takeoff trajectory, before passing the end of the runway: and
takeoff trajectory) or 200 feet horizontally within the boundaries of the aerodrome and 300 feet
horizontally after such limits, without inclination before reaching the height of 50 feet (as indicated
by the takeoff trajectory data) and, afterwards, with a slope not exceeding 15 degrees.
taking into account the effects of the wind, takeoff data based on calm air should be corrected
taking into account up to 50% of any reported headwind component and more than
150% of any reported tailwind component.
according to 121.173 (c).
<EOS>
121,179 Airplanes with conventional engines: limitations en route with all engines
operating
normal fuel and oil, if it is not possible to maintain a rate of climb (in feet per minute),
with all engines running, at least 6.90 VSO (that is, the number of feet per minute
obtained by multiplying the number of knots by 6.9) at an altitude of at least 1000 feet above
of the highest obstruction within 10 miles on each side of the intended course.
of the United States of America.
according to 121.173 (c).
<EOS>
121,181 Aircraft with conventional engines: limitations en route with an inoperative engine
conventional engines with a weight that, considering normal fuel and oil consumption, does not
allow a rate of climb (in feet per minute), with an inoperative engine, of at least
1000 feet above the highest obstruction within 10 miles on each side of the course
intended. However, for the purposes of this paragraph, the rate of climb for certified airplanes
according to part 4a of the “Civil Air Regulations” of the United States of America, it will be 0.026 VSO2.
approved, operate an airplane with conventional engines at an altitude, with all engines
operating, that allows the airplane to proceed, after an engine failure, to an aerodrome of
alternative where a landing can be made in accordance with 121,187, considering normal consumption of
fuel and oil. After the failure, the flight path must clear the ground and any obstructions within
5 miles on each side of the intended course for at least 2000 feet.
certificate must meet the following:
used in calculating the flight path of the airplane must be reduced by a value, in feet per minute,
equal to:
according to RBAC 25 and by 0, 026 VSO2 for airplanes certified according to part 4a of the “Civil Air
Regulations ”of the United States of America;
critical engine becomes inoperative at any point along the route, the flight can proceed to
a predetermined alternative aerodrome using such a procedure. In determining the weight
takeoff, it is assumed that the plane will pass over the critical obstruction after the engine fails in a
farthest from this obstruction than the nearest navigation radio position fix. THE
ANAC may approve a procedure established on a different basis if it is considered that
there are adequate operational guarantees;
used as an alternative in the procedure;
temperatures that may adversely affect the flight path;
provided that the certificate holder demonstrates that he has an appropriate training program, which
appropriate instructions are provided to flight crew members and that all other precautions are
taken into account to ensure a safe procedure;
alternative that meets the requirements of 121,625.
according to 121.173 (c).
<EOS>
121,183 Transport category aircraft (RBAC 25) with four or more conventional engines:
en-route limitations with two engines inoperative
conventional unless:
all engines operating at cruise power) from an aerodrome that meets the requirements of
121,187; or
inoperative, rise to 0.013 VSO2 feet per minute (that is, the number of feet per minute is obtained by
multiplication of the square of the number of nodes by 0.013) at an altitude of 1000 feet above the highest
elevation or obstruction within 10 miles on either side of the intended course or at an altitude of
5000 feet, whichever is higher.
take-off;
both engines fail and the remaining engines continue to operate beyond that point;
compliance with the rate of climb established at the minimum established altitude does not need to be
demonstrated on the descent ramp from the cruising altitude to the established minimum altitude, if such
requirements can be met when the minimum established altitude is reached, assuming
that the descent will be along a net flight path and that the descent rate will be 0.013
VSO2 greater than the ratio of the approved performance data;
engines is superior to that needed, with enough fuel, to proceed to a
aerodrome that meets the requirements of 121,187, reaching an altitude of at least 1000 feet
directly over that aerodrome.
<EOS>
121,185 Aircraft with conventional engines: landing limitations at the destination aerodrome
conventional engines less than their weight on arrival, considering normal consumption of
fuel and oil on the flight, allow a complete landing at the intended destination within 60% of the
effective length of each runway described below, from a point 50 feet directly above the
intersection of the obstacle release plan with the runway. For the purposes of determining the weight
landing allowance at the destination aerodrome, the following is assumed:
aircraft, other conditions such as landing aids and terrain and considering for the purpose of trajectory of
landing and rolling up to 50% of the headwind component or more than 150% of the headwind component
tail wind.
section can do so if an alternative aerodrome is indicated,
requirements of this section, considering that the total landing can be made in 70% of the effective length
the track.
according to 121.173 (c).
<EOS>
121,187 Aircraft with conventional engines: landing limitations at the alternative aerodrome
flight clearance, unless the airplane (at the estimated weight of the landing time at the aerodrome), based
under the assumptions of 121,185, can be brought to a complete stop after landing within 70% of the
effective runway length.
according to 121.173 (c).
<EOS>
121,189 Airplanes with turbine engines: takeoff limitations
provided in the Airplane Flight Manual (AFM) for the altitude of the aerodrome and for the temperature
take-off environment.
August 1957 and August 30, 1959 (SR422, 422A of the FAA), with a weight greater than the weight
foreseen in the AFM for the minimum distances required for takeoff. In the case of a type airplane
after September 30, l958 (FAA SR422A 422B), the takeoff distance may
include a "clearway" but the length of that "clearway" cannot be greater than half of the
takeoff run length.
August 1995 (FAA SR422B), with a weight greater than the weight provided for in the AFM, to meet the
following requirements:
track plus the length of the existing stopway;
length of the clearway, if any, and the length of the clearway included is not
it can be more than half the length of the track;
track length.
stipulated in the AFM:
minimum of (35 + 0.01D) feet vertically or for a minimum of 60m (200 feet) horizontally
while at the boundaries of the aerodrome and a minimum of 90 m (300 feet) horizontally beyond such
Limits. ("D" is the distance in feet along the intended flight path, from the end of the runway);
or
FAA), which allows a net takeoff path freeing all obstacles for a height
minimum of 35 feet vertically or at least 60m (200 feet) horizontally while inside
aerodrome boundaries and a minimum of 90m (300 feet) horizontally after passing those boundaries.
paragraphs from (a) to (d) of this section, corrections required by the altitude of the
aerodrome, effective runway gradient, ambient temperature and wind component at the time of
takeoff and, if the airplane flight manual contains information about runway performance
wet, the conditions of the runway surface (whether dry or wet). Distances on wet tracks
associated with tracks with a porous friction layer or grooves, if provided in the AFM, can only be
provided that the operator verifies that they are designed, constructed and maintained in a
acceptable by ANAC.
reach a height of 50 feet, as shown in the takeoff or net trajectory data
takeoff (as applicable) of the Airplane Flight Manual (AFM), and after that, the slope
lateral does not exceed l5º.
and "takeoff path" have the same meanings as those adopted in the rules
under which the plane was certified.
<EOS>
121,191 Airplanes with turbine engines: route limitations with an inoperative engine
Approved Flight for Airplane-AFM), considering normal fuel and oil consumption, which
allows compliance with paragraph (a) (l) or (2) of this section, based on the ambient temperature
expected en route:
elevation or obstacle within a 5-mile range on either side of the intended trajectory and, in
addition, if the aircraft was certified after August 29, 1959 (FAA SR422B), provide a
positive gradient at 1500 feet over the vertical of the aerodrome where the plane was supposed to land after
engine failure;
an aerodrome where a landing can be performed, in accordance with 121,197, freeing all
elevations and obstructions within a 5-mile range on either side of the trajectory intended by,
at least 2,000 feet high and with a positive gradient at 1000 feet high over the vertical of the
aerodrome where the plane was supposed to land after the engine failed. If the airplane type was
certified after September 30, 1958 (SR422A, FAA 422B), the positive gradient must exist
at 1500 feet above the vertical of the aerodrome;
said obstruction than the nearest navigation fixture or airway axis, unless ANAC
authorize a different procedure based on adequate guarantees given to operational security;
crews are properly instructed, that the training program is adequate and that all
precautions were taken to ensure a safe procedure;
appropriate approach and landing meteorological conditions; and
net flight path data from the plane's AFM.
<EOS>
121,193 Transport category airplanes with turbine engines: route limitations with two
dead engines
can operate an airplane with turbine engines along a route, unless it meets one of the
following two conditions:
engines operating at cruise power) from an aerodrome that meets the requirements of 121,197;
inoperable in the AFM, allow the airplane to fly from the point where the simultaneous stop is assumed
from two engines to an aerodrome that meets the requirements of 121,197, with a net trajectory of
flight (taking into account the expected temperatures along the route) with a positive gradient in the
1000 feet above the highest elevation or obstacle in the 5-mile range for each
side of the intended route or at an altitude of 5000 feet, whichever is higher.
For the purposes of paragraph (a) (2) of this section, it is assumed that both engines fail
simultaneously at the most critical point on the route and that, if fuel jetting is permitted, the
weight of the plane at the point where the engine failure occurs includes enough fuel to fly to the
aerodrome and reach 1000 feet in height from the aerodrome and that fuel consumption and
oil, after engine failure, is the same consumption as foreseen in the net flight path data
of the airplane's AFM.
No one can operate an airplane with turbine engines along a route, unless it meets the
one of the following two conditions:
engines running at cruising power) from an aerodrome that meets the requirements of
121,197;
inoperative parts of the AFM, allow the airplane to fly from the point where the simultaneous stop is assumed
from two engines to an aerodrome that meets the requirements of 121,197, with a net trajectory of
flight (taking into account the expected temperatures along the route) with a positive gradient in the
1000 feet above the highest elevation or obstacle in the 5-mile range for each
the desired route or at an altitude of 2000 feet, whichever is higher.
For the purposes of paragraph (b) (2) of this section, it is assumed that both engines fail
simultaneously at the most critical point on the route, that the weight of the plane at the point where the
engines includes enough fuel to fly to the aerodrome, reaching the vertical of the aerodrome
1500 feet high and after that, fly another 15 minutes with power or cruise thrust and that the
fuel and oil consumption after engine failure is the same consumption as foreseen in the data
net flight path from the AFM to the plane.
turbine engines along a route, unless it meets one of the following two conditions:
engines running on cruise power) from an aerodrome that meets the requirements of
121,197;
inoperative parts of the AFM, allow the airplane to fly from the point where the simultaneous stop is assumed
from two engines to an aerodrome that meets the requirements of 121,197, with a net trajectory of
flight (taking into account the expected temperatures along the route) with a positive gradient in the
2000 feet above the highest elevation or obstacle in the 5-mile range for each
side of the intended route. For the purposes of this paragraph, it is assumed that:
aerodrome where the plane is supposed to land after engine failure;
that their crews are properly educated, that the training program is adequate and that
all precautions have been taken to ensure a safe procedure;
enough fuel to proceed to the aerodrome, reaching its vertical at least 1500
feet high and then fly another 15 minutes with power or cruise thrust; and
in the AFM net flight path data for the plane.
<EOS>
121,195 Aircraft with turbine engines: landing limitations at the destination aerodrome
normal fuel and oil on the flight to the destination and alternate aerodrome) such that, in
arrival, exceed the landing weight provided for in the AFM for the altitude of the destination aerodrome or
alternative and to the expected ambient temperature at the estimated landing time.
an airplane with turbine engines, unless, its weight on arrival, considering normal consumption
in-flight fuel and oil (and according to AFM landing distance data, taking into account
account the altitude of the destination aerodrome and the expected wind conditions at the estimated time of
landing), allows you to perform a complete landing at the destination aerodrome using 60% of the
of each of the runways mentioned below, considering that the plane passes 50 feet above the
vertical intersection of the obstacle clearance plane with the runway. To determine the weight
allowable landing time at the destination aerodrome, it is assumed that:
wind, characteristics of maneuverability on the ground of the airplane type and other variables such as aid
landing and terrain.
section can do so if an alternative aerodrome is indicated that meets all the requirements of this
section and, additionally, that it can perform a complete landing at that aerodrome using 70% of the
effective track length.
wet, if a shorter landing distance (but never shorter than required by paragraph (b)
section) has been approved for a specific airplane type and model and included in your AFM,
no one can take off with a jet powered plane when predictions or information
meteorological conditions indicate that the runway at the destination aerodrome may be wet or slippery
at the estimated landing time at that aerodrome, unless the effective runway length of the
destination aerodrome is at least 115% of the runway length required by paragraph
paragraph (b) (2) of this section may do so if it indicates an alternative aerodrome that meets all
the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
<EOS>
121,197 Aircraft with turbine engines. Landing limitations at the alternative aerodrome
No one may designate an aerodrome as an alternative aerodrome in the flight dispatch of a
airplane with turbine engines, unless (based on the assumptions of 121,195 (b)) that airplane, with the
weight predicted for the landing time at the aerodrome, can perform a complete landing using 70%
the effective runway length for turboprop aircraft, and 60% of the effective runway length for
jet propelled airplanes, considering that the plane passes vertically from the intersection of the plane of
clearing obstacles with the track 50 feet high. In the case of an alternative aerodrome for
takeoffs, as foreseen in 121,617, can be considered the jettisoning of fuel, besides the
normal consumption of fuel and oil, in determining the expected weight at the estimated time of
landing.
<EOS>
121,198 Freight transport category aircraft: increase in zero fuel and fuel weights
landing
Subject to paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section, a certificate holder may operate (in
cargo only) any of the following aircraft (of type certified by Part 4b of the “Civil Air
Regulation ”of the United States of America effective before March 13, 1965) with zero weights
increased fuel and landing costs:
supplementary SA 4-1402.
structural landing weight can be increased above the approved maximum in full compliance
with the applicable regulations, only if ANAC considers that:
applicable regulations; and
landing gear cannot exceed the amount, in pounds, of the increase in zero fuel weight.
approved for operation with increased weights and prepared and issued by the manufacturer of the type of
plane.
performance for passenger transportation established in this regulation.
appropriately revised to include operational limitations and information necessary to
operations with increased weight.
with weights increased according to this section must, before being used in service with passengers,
be inspected using special inspection procedures for return to service
passengers prepared by the manufacturer and approved by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,199 Airplanes not included in the transport category: takeoff limitations
than what allows the plane to be brought to a complete stop within the effective length of the
runway from any point during takeoff before reaching 105% of the minimum take-off speed
control (the lowest speed at which the airplane can be safely controlled, in flight, after a
engine becomes inoperative) or 115% of stall speed without power in
takeoff, whichever is greater.
acceleration;
at least 150% of the reported tailwind component;
total length) should be considered if it is greater than 0.5%;
from the runway from which takeoff started to the point at which the obstacle release plan
associated with the other end of the runway intersects the center line of the runway.
<EOS>
121,201 Aircraft not included in the transport category: route limitations with one engine
dead
included in the transport category with a weight that does not allow a climb rate of at least
at least 50 feet per minute, with the critical engine inoperative, at an altitude of at least 1000 feet
above the highest obstruction within 5 miles on either side of the intended course, or
5000 feet, whichever is higher.
is not harmed, a person can operate the airplane at an altitude that allows, in the event of a
engine, clear all obstructions within 5 miles on each side of the intended course.
If such a procedure is used, the descent ratio for the appropriate weight and altitude is assumed to be
50 feet per minute greater than the ratio of the approved performance data. Before approving
such procedure, ANAC must take into consideration for the route, route segment or area the
Following:
turbulence normally encountered;
<EOS>
121,203 Aircraft not included in the transport category: landing limitations at the aerodrome of
destiny
allows you to make a landing with a total stop within 60% of the effective runway length plus
destination aerodrome; and
bow and at least 150% of the tailwind component.
a height of 50 feet, on a stable glide approach and at a true speed of at least
less 1.3 VSO;
<EOS>
121,205 Airplanes not included in the transport category: landing limitations at the aerodrome of
alternative
No one may list, in a dispatch or flight clearance, an aerodrome as an aerodrome of
alternative for an airplane not included in the transport category, unless that airplane (in the weight
expected arrival time), based on the assumptions of 121,203, can be brought to a
total stop after landing within 70% of the actual runway length.
<EOS>
121,207 Operating limitations of aircraft with provisional type certificate
Unless otherwise authorized by ANAC, in addition to the limitations provided for in section 91.317
of RBAC 91, the following limitations apply to the operation, by certificate holders, of
airplanes with an airworthiness certificate issued on the basis of a provisional type certificate:
persons listed in paragraph 121.547 (c) of this regulation or those persons specifically
authorized not only by the certificate holder but also by ANAC.
this section and must keep complete and accurate records of each inspection made and each maintenance
performed on the plane. The certificate holder must make such records available to ANAC,
whenever required.
<EOS>
121,208 Airplane performance control system
make performance data and obstacles available to appropriate operations personnel.
SUBPART J
SPECIAL AIRWORTHINESS REQUIREMENTS
<EOS>
121,211 Applicability
certified as set out in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section.
effective before November 1, 1946, must meet the special requirements contained in 121,215
up to 121,283.
full compliance with any requirement under paragraph (b) of this section would be extremely
difficult and that such compliance would not materially contribute to the desired objective, can be
compliance is required only with those requirements that are necessary to achieve the
basic objectives of this regulation.
transport, certified type after December 31, 1964, unless the airplane meets the requirements
airworthiness requirements of 121,293.
<EOS>
121,213 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,215 Cabin interiors
requirements in this section.
at least flame resistant (see RBAC 01).
with "no smoking" signs and the remaining areas must be equipped with ashtrays
self-contained.
<EOS>
121,217 Internal doors
Whenever the internal doors have shutters or other means of ventilation, there must be a
convenient way for the crew to close the airflow through them when necessary.
<EOS>
121,219 Ventilation
Each control or passenger cabin must be adequately ventilated. The concentration of
carbon monoxide cannot be greater than one part in 20,000 parts of air and there should be no
fuel vapors. Whenever the separations between the cabins have shutters or other
devices that allow airflow between them, there must be a convenient way for the
crew close this airflow if necessary.
<EOS>
121,221 Fire precautions
meet the following requirements:
in the event of failure or damage, affect the safe operation of the airplane unless the item is properly
shielded, isolated or otherwise protected, so that it cannot be damaged by
movement of cargo in the compartment and that damage or failure of the item does not create a fire hazard
in the compartment;
the compartment;
mooring, must be at least flame resistant;
classifications set out in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section.
your normal service station; and
manual fire extinguisher available for each class A compartment.
in-flight access is sufficient to allow a crew member to effectively reach the entire
the compartment and its contents with a manual fire extinguisher and if the compartment is
designed so that when in-flight access is used, there is no flow of quantities
smoke, flames or extinguishing agent to any part of the cabin occupied by
passengers or crew. Each class B compartment must meet the following requirements:
at the pilot's or flight mechanic's station;
additional flame-resistant protection can be used.
meet the requirements of Categories "A", "B" or "E". Each class C compartment must meet
to the following:
at the pilot's or flight mechanic's station;
the pilot or flight mechanic station;
extinguishing agent reach the cabin of passengers or crew;
can control any fire started in the compartment;
of flame resistant material, can be used.
passengers can be considered as class "E" compartment. Each class E compartment
must meet the following requirements:
pilot or flight mechanic seated at his normal service station;
from him. The control of this means must be accessible to flight crew members, in their cabin;
toxics penetrate the flight crew cabin;
of the cargo on board.
<EOS>
121.223 Proof of compliance with the requirements of 121.221
Compliance with the provisions of 121.221 with regard to the accessibility of the compartment, the
entry of dangerous amounts of smoke or extinguishing agent into the cabin occupied by crew members
or passengers and the distribution of extinguishing agent in class "C" compartment must be demonstrated
in flight. During these tests it must be demonstrated that there is no inadvertent operation of
fire or smoke detectors in other aircraft compartments as a result of a contained fire
in any compartment neither during nor after the fire fighting, unless the fire
extinguishing agent fills these compartments simultaneously
<EOS>
121,225 Propeller defrost fluid
Section 121.255 must be met if fuel fluid is used to defrost the propeller.
121.227 Pressure cross feed system
used to transport cargo or people, unless:
or
ventilated and drained to the outside of the plane. However, such compartments do not need to be
used if the pipelines do not incorporate any connection within the areas of transport of people
or loads and are properly positioned and protected to prevent accidental damage.
placed at each end should incorporate pressure relief provisions
excessive pressure resulting from the exposure of such pipes, when isolated, to high temperatures.
<EOS>
121,229 Location of fuel tanks
larger air outlet from the engine compartment can be used as a tank wall
of integral fuel.
fuel and vapors.
<EOS>
121.231 Fuel system pipes and connections
vibration and must be suitable to withstand loads due to system pressure and conditions
in-flight acceleration.
Relative provisions should incorporate provisions for flexibility.
flexible hoses with screw terminals instead of flexible hoses with clamps.
particular application.
<EOS>
121.233 Pipes and connections of the fuel system in designated fire zones
Pipes and connections of the fuel system passing designated fire zones must be
comply with the provisions of 121,259.
<EOS>
121,235 Fuel valves
Each fuel valve must:
not transmitting them to the pipes connected to it.
<EOS>
121.237 Oil pipelines and connections in designated fire zones
Oil pipelines and connections passing designated fire zones must comply with the provisions of
121,259.
<EOS>
121,239 Oil valves
and
flight, not transmitting them to the pipes connected to it.
propellers, unless equivalent safety provisions are incorporated.
<EOS>
121,241 Drains of the oil system
There must be accessible drains that allow all the oil to be drained from the system. Each drain must have
means, automatic or manual, of effective locking in the "closed" position.
<EOS>
121,243 Engine breather lines
can freeze and clog the lines, do not accumulate at any point.
fire in the event of foaming or at a point where the oil emitted from these lines does not reach
the windshields of the drivers.
<EOS>
121,245 Fire walls
Each engine, auxiliary power unit, fuel-burning heater, or other
combustion equipment to be used in flight must be isolated from the rest of the aircraft by means of
fire wall, armor or equivalent means.
<EOS>
121.247 Fire wall construction
engine compartment for other parts of the plane;
fire or with special connections for fire walls;
<EOS>
121.249 Engine hood
and the aerodynamic loads to which it is normally subjected.
land and in flight. Drains must not discharge into places that present a fire hazard. The parts
hoods subjected to high temperatures because they are close to the engine exhaust system or due to
exhaust gas impact should be constructed of fireproof material.
Unless otherwise specified in this regulation, all other parts of the roof
they must be made of at least fire-resistant material.
<EOS>
121.251 Engine accessories section diaphragm
Unless equivalent protection can be demonstrated by other means, there must be a diaphragm
all parts of the exhaust system of any air-cooled engine.
<EOS>
121.253 Fire protection in engines
121,261.
combustion equipment.
<EOS>
121,255 Flammable fluids
flammable materials can be located in designated fire zones, unless the fluid contained, the project
of the system, the materials used in the tank, the shut-off valves, the pipes, the connections and the
system controls provide equivalent security.
reservoir and the fire-wall or shield isolating a designated fire zone.
<EOS>
121,257 Flow shut-off valves
hazardous fuel, oil, defrosting liquid and other flammable liquids that may flow into
inside, circulate inside, or pass through a designated fire zone. However, there is no
need to cut the flow in pipes that are an integral part of the engine.
compatible with the emergency operation of other equipment, such as flagging
propellers, aiming to facilitate the rapid and effective control of fires.
equivalent security is provided. It must be demonstrated that, after the flow cut,
no amount of flammable liquid is drained into a designated fire zone.
of a flow cutter and to make it possible for the crew to reopen the cutter
after its closure.
<EOS>
121,259 Pipes and connections
located in a designated fire zone, fixed directly to the engine or subject to relative movements
between components (except piping and connections forming an integral part of the motor) must be flexible
and fire resistant, with terminals fixed by the manufacturer or detachable, but fire resistant.
components must be made of fire-resistant material.
<EOS>
121,261 Ventilation and drain pipes
All ventilation and drain pipes and their connections that carry liquids or gases
flammable and are located in designated fire zones, provided that ANAC considers that their
rupture or breakage may constitute a fire hazard, must comply with the provisions of 121.259.
<EOS>
121,263 Fire extinguishing systems
However, if it is demonstrated that the use of fireproof material in the nacelle and other
components subject to fire provides equivalent protection against the destruction of the aircraft in
in case of fire, extinguishing systems can be dispensed with.
extinguishing agent, becoming an additional danger.
<EOS>
121,265 Fire extinguishing agents
Only methyl bromide, carbon dioxide and other agents that have been shown to provide
equivalent extinguishing action can be used as a fire extinguishing agent. If the bromide of
methyl or other toxic agent is used, provision should be made to prevent dangerous concentrations
of fluid or steam entering the cabin during normal operation or accidental discharge of fire extinguishers
fire, on the ground or in flight. If methyl bromide extinguishers are used, the cylinders must be
be loaded with dry agent and sealed by the extinguisher manufacturer or by an authorized person
have suitable charging equipment. If carbon dioxide extinguishers are used, do not
it must be possible to discharge a quantity of gas that creates a choking hazard for the occupants of the
cabin.
<EOS>
121.267 Pressure relief in fire extinguisher cylinders
The cylinders of fire extinguishers must have pressure relief valves to prevent
accidental discharge due to excessive internal pressures. The discharge lines from the
relief valves must end outside the plane, in a place of easy inspection on the ground. There must be a
indicator at the end of the discharge line, providing a visual indication when the cylinder discharges
through the relief valve.
<EOS>
121.269 Temperature of the cylinder compartment of fire extinguishers
Precautions must be taken to ensure that the cylinders of the fire extinguishing system
installed in places where reasonable ambient temperatures can be maintained, ensuring
the effective use of the system in any situation.
<EOS>
121,271 Materials used in the fire extinguishing system
fire in a designated fire zone must be made of fireproof material.
flexible material, at least fire resistant, and located so as to minimize the
probability of failure.
<EOS>
121,273 Fire detection system
A sufficient number of fast-acting fire detectors must be placed in each designated zone
fire, in order to ensure the detection of any fire that may occur in that area.
<EOS>
121,275 Fire detectors
Fire detectors must be manufactured and installed in such a way as to ensure their ability to
without fail to withstand all vibration, inertia and other loads to which they may normally be exposed
subjects. Fire detectors cannot be affected by gases, oil, water or other fluids that
can hit them.
<EOS>
121.277 Protection of other components of the airplane against fire
in the area comprised of a nacelle diameter on both sides of the center line of each nacelle,
it must be constructed of at least fire-resistant material.
nacelles, unless the dimensional configuration of the airplane is such that the surfaces of the warp
may be affected by heat, flames or sparks emanating from a designated fire zone or the
engine compartment of any nacelle.
<EOS>
121.279 Engine speed control
stop and restart the rotation of any engine in flight.
engines if it is judged that rotation may impair the safety of the aircraft.
<EOS>
121,281 Independence of the fuel system
any of the components does not result in irretrievable loss of power from more than one engine.
demonstrated that the fuel system includes features that provide safety
equivalent.
<EOS>
121.283 Prevention of ice in the air induction system
Each airplane must have a system that prevents malfunction of each engine due to accumulation
of ice in the air induction system of that engine.
<EOS>
121,285 Cargo transportation in the passenger cabin
transport cargo in the passenger cabin of an airplane.
transported in an approved compartment that meets the following requirements:
applicable to the passenger seats of the airplane on which it is installed multiplied by a factor of 1.15
using the combined weight of the compartment with the maximum load weight that can be transported
the same;
instructions necessary for the proper distribution of mass inside the compartment, must be
clearly written on it;
that exceeds the loading limitations of that structure;
and this fixation must withstand the applicable load factors and emergency landing conditions
to the passenger seats of the airplane in which it is installed, multiplied by the factor of 1.15
or the seat fixation factor specified for the airplane, whichever is greater, using the weight
combined compartment with the maximum load weight that can be transported in it;
required emergency exit or from the passenger cabin aisle;
the flames;
cargo holders slide in emergency landing conditions;
in relation to "do not smoke", "wear belts" signs or any required exit signs, unless
there are auxiliary signs or other approved means of adequate warning to passengers.
passengers, provided that the cargo is properly secured to withstand the expected load factors
in section 25.561 (b) (3) of RBAC 25 and be placed as follows:
has enough strength to eliminate the possibility of movement under any conditions
expected in flight or on the ground;
passenger cabin occupants;
structural components of these components;
required, or the aisle of the passenger cabin;
smoke "," wear belts "and" exit "required, unless there are auxiliary signs or other means
of adequate notice to passengers.
<EOS>
121.287 Transporting cargo in the cargo hold
Cargo carried in cargo compartments, designed in such a way as to require the physical entry of
a crew member to fight any fire that may occur in flight, must be distributed in a
in order to allow a crew member to effectively reach all parts of the compartment with a
manual fire extinguisher.
<EOS>
121.289 Landing gear audible alarm
January 1992 onwards, each aircraft must have a landing gear audible alarm device
that works continuously under the following conditions:
are extended beyond the maximum certified position for descent in
approach provided for in the AFM, and the landing gear is not fully lowered and locked;
flaps are extended beyond the position in which the lowering of the train is normally performed
and the landing gear is not fully lowered and locked.
with normal certification requirements, and
sonorous.
<EOS>
121.291 Demonstration of procedure for emergency evacuation
conduct a real demonstration of emergency evacuation procedures in accordance with
paragraph (a) of Appendix D to this regulation, demonstrating that each type and model of airplane with
configuration for passengers with more than 44 seats, to be used in their operations transporting
passengers, allows a total evacuation of passengers and crew in 90 seconds or less:
comply with this paragraph as valid on or after October 24, 1967 or if, during the period
of aircraft type certification, in accordance with the requirements of section 25.803 of RBAC 25, effective
from December 1, 1978;
in accordance with paragraph (a) of Appendix D to this regulation valid from that date
or in accordance with the requirements of section 25,803 effective as of the same date.
44 passenger seats should conduct a partial demonstration of the seating procedures
emergency evacuation in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section by:
unless a demonstration in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section has been carried out;
the flight attendants required by 121,391; or
emergency opening of the exits available for evacuation.
certificate must:
evacuation procedures through a demonstration, without using passengers, in which the
flight attendants of that type and model of airplane, using normal operating procedures, open
50% of the emergency exits at floor level required and 50% of the other emergency exits
required, whose opening by a commissioner is defined as an emergency evacuation duty
according to 121.397, and deploy 50% of the exit slides. Exits and slides will be
selected randomly by ANAC and must be ready for use within 15 seconds;
who have completed the training program approved by ANAC for the airplane type and model
and who have passed a written test or practice of emergency procedures and equipment;
and
plane.
over large stretches of water or that, due to mandatory provisions in the regulations or by option,
has the equipment required in section 121.339, it must demonstrate, performing a simulation of
lashing according to paragraph (b) of Appendix D of this regulation, which has the capacity
to efficiently carry out its procedures for this type of emergency. For holders of
certificate subject to paragraph 121.2 (a) (1), this paragraph only applies when a new type
or model airplane is included in its operating specification after January 19, 2001. (Redaction
given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
specified in paragraph (d) of this section, for an airplane type and model, the requirements of the
paragraphs (b) (2), (b) (4) and (b) (5) of Appendix D of this regulation shall be considered as
serviced if each lifeboat is removed from its place, if a lifeboat is thrown away
of the plane and inflated (or a slide is inflated) and if the crew assigned to the boat
inflated demonstrate to know and use each item of the required emergency equipment. The boat
or the slide to be inflated will be chosen by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,293 Special requirements for airworthiness for airplanes of categories not included in the
transport category, certified type after December 31, 1964
No certificate holder may operate an airplane of a category not included in the category
after December 20, 1999, unless the airplane has a safety alarm system.
takeoff that meets the requirements of section 25.703 of RBAC 25. However, the alarm system
takeoff does not have to cover the function of any device for which it has been demonstrated that
Takeoff with this device, in the most unfavorable position, will not create a hazardous condition.
<EOS>
121,295 [Reserved]
SUBPART K
INSTRUMENT AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS
<EOS>
121,301 Applicability
This subpart establishes instrument and equipment requirements for all holders of
certificate.
<EOS>
121,302 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,303 Aircraft equipment and instruments
required by this subpart apply to all operations under this regulation.
installed in accordance with the airworthiness requirements applicable to them.
information from the AFM on speed and each relevant sign must be expressed in us.
unless the following instruments and equipment are operational:
airworthiness standards according to which the aircraft type has been certified and those required by
paragraphs 121,213 through 121,283 and 121,289;
121,360 for any type of operation and equipment and instruments specified from 121,323 to
121,351 for the characteristics of the authorized operation, whenever these items are no longer required
paragraph (d) (1) of this section. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,305 Flight and navigation equipment
No one can operate an airplane that is not equipped with the following equipment and
flight and navigation instruments:
equivalent of preventing malfunction due to ice formation, per pilot required.
altimeter "), per pilot required.
visible from each pilot position.
pilot required when there is a third attitude indicator usable in 360 degrees of variation
pitch and bearing, installed in accordance with paragraph (k) of this section.
according to paragraph (k) of this section:
excluding any crew seats, or payload capacity greater than 7,500 lb;
less, excluding any crew member seats, and payload capacity of 7500 lb or less
that was manufactured after March 20, 1997, inclusive;
up to 30 passenger seats and payload capacity of 7500 lb or less that has been
manufactured after March 20, 1997.
electrical generation;
the pilot;
visible and usable by any of the pilots in their normal workstation; and
<EOS>
121,306 Portable electronic devices
or pilot in command of an airplane can authorize the use of any electronic device
any civil aircraft registered in Brazil operating under this regulation. (Essay
given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
or (Wording given by Resolution No. 549, of 20.03.2020)
according to RBAC 119 has determined not to cause interference with communications systems
or navigation of the airplane on which it is being used. (Included by Resolution No. 549, of
20.03.2020)
certificate issued according to RBAC 119 that intends to authorize the operation of the particular device
on board their planes, and must establish adequate procedures for the use of each device
portable electronic device that you have authorized on board your aircraft, and such procedures
must be included in the manual required by 121.133. (Wording given by Resolution No. 549, of
20.03.2020)
<EOS>
121,307 Engine instruments
Unless ANAC allows or requires different instrumentation for airplanes with
turbine to provide equivalent safety, no one may conduct any operation under this
regulation without the following engine instruments:
equipped with an automatic control of mixing with the altitude;
used.
transfer or separate reservoir is used;
central alarm device for all engines, with a means of isolating each individual circuit
central device alarm;
is in the reverse step and meets the following:
minimum and the total reversal stop, but cannot give any indication on the normal stop of
minimum step or above it;
directly at that angle.
<EOS>
121,308 Washbasin protection against fire
airplane is equipped with a smoke detector system or equivalent system that provides a
luminous alarm in the control cabin or a luminous or audible alarm in the passenger cabin
that can be readily detected by a commissioner, taking into account the positioning
flight attendants along the passenger cabin during the various phases of the flight.
aircraft is equipped with a permanent fire extinguishing system capable of
extinguish fire in each container of used towels or papers in the washbasin. Such a system of
fire extinguishing should be designed to automatically discharge into each container, so
soon there is a fire in it.
or (2) it can operate an airplane with a configuration of 30 or less seats for passengers who
does not meet the requirements of the smoke detector system described in paragraph (a) of this section and the
fire extinguisher requirements described in paragraph (b) of this section.
certified after December 31, 1964, with a configuration of 10 to 19 seats for passengers,
unless this airplane meets the smoke detector system requirements described in paragraph
cockpit alert or aural alert that is immediately recognized by the crew.
<EOS>
121,309 Emergency equipment
emergency services listed in this section and at 121,310.
121,339, 121,340 and 121,353:
operational specifications, ensuring its condition of continuous validity and immediate
availability of operation in emergencies;
passengers;
and
must have an indication of its content. Additionally, the compartment, enclosure or the item itself
must have the date of the last inspection required for this section.
cargo compartments and galleys. Portable fire extinguishers of
type approved for use in the cockpits of passengers, passengers, cargo compartment and galleys,
according to the following:
possible to occur in the compartment in which it is intended to be used and, in the passenger cabin,
be designed to minimize the danger of toxic gas concentrations;
for use in each class E cargo compartment, located in such a way that it is easily accessible to the
crew member during the flight;
conveniently positioned to be used in each "galley" located in a compartment that
not passengers, crew or cargo;
cockpit for flight crew use;
passengers should be conveniently located and, when two or more are required,
evenly distributed throughout each area of ​​the cabin. Passenger cabins must be
provided with portable fire extinguishers in the following quantities:
seats, at least one extinguisher;
seats, at least two fire extinguishers;
there must be at least the following quantities of fire extinguishers:
Passenger seats Minimum number of fire extinguishers
61 to 200, 3;
201 to 300, 4;
301 to 400, 5;
401 to 500, 6;
501 to 600.7;
601 or more, 8.
established in paragraph (c) (5) of this section, for those cases where the "galley" is located in the cabin
passengers, at least one of the fire extinguishers must be conveniently positioned to be
easily accessible for use in said "galley";
must contain 1211 halon (bromo-chloro-difluoro-methane) or equivalent as an extinguishing agent. Fur
least one portable fire extinguisher in the passenger cabin must contain halon 1211 (bromo-chloro-difluoro-
methane) or equivalent as an extinguishing agent.
doctor and protective gloves as follows:
treatment of injuries and ailments that may occur in flight or in minor accidents. Such
assemblies must meet the specifications and requirements of Appendix A of this regulation;
number of first aid kits on board, such gloves should be distributed to the
the plane as evenly as practicable;
December 31, 1964, each plane must be equipped with an ax.
portable, battery-powered, readily accessible to crew members assigned to guide
emergency evacuations and installed as follows:
passengers, located at the rearmost point of the passenger cabin, where it can be
quickly accessible from a normal steward seat. However, ANAC may authorize another
location deemed most convenient for evacuation during an emergency;
99 passengers, one installed at the front and one at the rear, where they can be quickly accessible from a
normal commissioner seat.
<EOS>
121,310 Additional emergency equipment
carrying passengers (excluding emergency exits on wings) that are far from the ground
more than 1.80 m (6 feet), with the plane on the ground and the landing gear lowered, must have an approved means
to help occupants get down to the ground. The means of assistance for emergency exits at the
floor must meet the requirements of paragraph 25.809 (f) (1) of RBAC 25, effective on 30
April l972, except that any aircraft whose type certification application has been submitted
after that date it must comply with the requirements according to which the airplane has been certified. A means of help
that opens and positions itself automatically must be armed during taxi, takeoff and landing.
However, if it is judged that the design of an outlet makes opening and positioning impractical
automatic assistance, a partial deviation from the automation requirement may be allowed, provided
the aid means, after being opened manually, to position itself and provided that it is conducted
an emergency evacuation demonstration, according to 121.291 (a), using such an exit. This paragraph
does not apply to the rear emergency exit window of DC-3 aircraft authorized to use
passengers and operated with less than 36 occupants, including crew members, and with less than 5 exits.
meet the following requirements:
clearly indicated. The identification and location of each passenger emergency exit
it must be easily recognizable from a distance equal to the width of the passenger cabin. THE
The location of each passenger emergency exit must be indicated by an indication
visible by an occupant approaching along the aisle of the passenger cabin. It might have
a location signal:
of the ceiling if it is more practical due to its low height;
indicator can serve two of these exits if both are readily identifiable from the location of the
signal; and
or backwards along the cab, to indicate emergency exits beyond them. If it is not
this positioning of the signs is possible, they can be placed in another appropriate location.
meet the following:
type certification application was submitted before May 1, 1972, each nomination and
each passenger emergency exit location sign must be manufactured in accordance with the
requirements of paragraph 25.812 (b) of RBAC 25, effective April 30, 1972. On these airplanes
no signal can continue to be used if its luminescence drops below 100 microlamberts. At
colors can be inverted if the emergency lighting of the cabin improves. However, they can
deviations from the 5 cm (2 in.) wide bottom plate requirement should be allowed, if judged
that there are special circumstances that make compliance with the same impracticable and that
proposed solution provides an equivalent level of security;
submitted on or after May 1, 1972, each indication and each location sign of exit from
Passenger emergency must be manufactured in compliance with the requirements under which the aircraft was
certificate. On these planes, no signal can continue to be used if their luminescence falls below
250 microlamberts;
December 1964, each passenger emergency exit marked and each scoreboard indicating
these outlets must be manufactured to have white letters with a height of 1 inch (25.4 mm), be
self-lit or be electrically lit independently and have a luminescence of at least
minus 160 microlamberts. Color can be reversed if the lighting in the passenger compartment
is essentially the same. In these planes, no scoreboard should continue to be used if their
luminescence drops below 100 microlamberts. (Wording given by Resolution No. 524, of August 2, 2019)
included in the certified transport category after December 31, 1964, each aircraft
carrying passengers must have an emergency lighting system independent of the
main lighting system. However, the normal cabin lighting sources (lamps)
can be common to both systems, as long as the emergency lighting power source
independent of the power source of normal lighting. The emergency lighting system
he must:
luminosity, when measured at 100 cm (40 in.) intervals and at the height of the armrests,
in the center line of the aisle of the passenger cabin, is at least 0.54 lumens / m2 (0.05 ft-
candle); and
must have indications of the trajectory for the emergency exits, close to the floor, which
comply with the requirements of paragraph 25,812 (e) of RBAC 25, effective November 26, 1984.
emergency lighting in accordance with paragraph 25.812 (h) of RBAC 25, which serve as
lighting to no more than a means of escape aid, which are independent of the system
the main emergency lighting of the aircraft and which are automatically activated when the
assistance is triggered, each lamp required by paragraphs (c) and (h) of this section must meet the
Following:
passengers readily accessible from a flight attendant seat;
turn on, respectively, as soon as the plane's normal electrical power cuts off.
In accordance with this paragraph, it is not necessary to consider the hypothesis of a transverse rupture of
fuselage;
minutes, in critical environmental conditions, after an emergency landing;
"armed", "on" and "off" positions.
submitted before May 1, 1972, the location of each outlet opening device
emergency and instructions on how to operate it should be shown by a sign at or near the exit
of it that is readable from 76 cm (30 in.) away. Additionally, for each Type I or
Type II, with opening mechanism by rotating a lever, the operating instructions
opening should be illustrated by:
tip twice the width of the body, extending over an arc of 70 degrees and with a radius
approximately equal to 3/4 of the length of the opening lever; and
arrowhead.
submitted on or after May 1, 1972, the location of each exit opening device
emergency and instructions on how to operate it must be shown in accordance with the requirements
according to which the plane was certified. In these planes, no opening device and its
respective protective cover can continue to be used if its luminescence drops below 100
microlamberts.
emergency exits according to the following:
Type I or Type II must be unobstructed and at least 50 cm (20 in.) Wide;
paragraph (a) of this section, to allow a crew member to assist in the evacuation of passengers without
reduce the clear passage width required by paragraph (f) (1) of this section. However, the
ANAC may authorize deviations from this requirement for a certified type airplane according to the provisions
of Part 4b of the “Civil Air Regulations”, of the United States of America, in effect before 20
December 1951, if it is considered that there are special circumstances providing a level of
equivalent security;
from the corridor to these exits must not be obstructed by seats, beds or other obstacles which,
one way or another, may reduce the effectiveness of the exit; additionally:
1972, access must comply with the requirements of paragraph 25.813 (c) of RBAC 25, effective on
April 1972; and
1972, or at a later date, access must meet the requirements under which the airplane received
type certification, except that:
1958 must meet the requirements of paragraph 25,813 (c) of RBAC 25, effective on June 3,
1992.
verified that special circumstances make compliance impractical. Such circumstances
Special conditions include the following conditions, but are not limited to them, when it is impossible to
obtaining compliance with paragraph 25.813 (c) (1) (i) or (ii) of RBAC 25, without reducing the
total number of seats for passengers: emergency exits placed very close to others;
fixed installations such as washbasins, galleys, etc .; permanent installation partitions; number
insufficient rows of seats in front of or behind the exit, preventing compliance without
reduce the distance between two rows of seats by more than 2.5 cm (1 in.) or reduce the total distance
between two rows less than 76 cm (30 in.). The application for obtaining the deviation must include
plausible reasons for justifying non-compliance with the requirements of paragraph
25,813 (c) (1) (ii) or (iii) of RBAC 25, and a description of the measures taken to achieve a level of
security as close as practicable to that provided by the fulfillment of the referred to
requirements.
passenger cabin, it is necessary to cross a passage connecting two areas of the passenger cabin
passengers, such a passage must be unobstructed. However, curtains can be used as long as
they allow free passage through the passage;
passengers;
to achieve a required emergency exit from any passenger seat, the
The door must have a locking device in the open position and must remain open and locked.
at takeoffs and landings. The locking device in the open position must withstand the loads
imposed on it when the door is subjected to the final inertia loads related to the structures
neighbors listed in paragraph 25,561 (b) of RBAC 25;
opening marks must be marked on the outside surface of the airplane. There should be a colored stripe with
5 cm (2 in.) Wide, surrounding the outer perimeter of each emergency exit on the side of the
fuselage. If the airplane has areas of its outer covering that can be cut to
facilitate the rescue of people, such areas must be demarcated by a segmented band, each
segment 3 cm (1 in.) wide and 9 cm (3.5 in.) long; the corners of the area should
be demarcated by two continuous segments forming right angles and the interval between segments
it must not exceed 2m (79 in.). Each external mark, including the strips, must be promptly
distinguishable from neighboring areas in the fuselage by color contrast. Brands must meet the
Following:
be at least 45%;
minus 30% reflectance between it and the lightest color;
opening and applicable instructions clearly marked in red or, if red is not
distinguishable against the background color, in bright orange. When the opening device for such
exit is located only on one side of the fuselage, a visible indication of this fact must be
placed on the opposite side "Reflectance" is the ratio between the luminous flux reflected by a body and the
luminous flux that it is receiving.
type aircraft was presented before December 31, 1964, each airplane carrying passengers must
be equipped with external emergency lighting complying with the following requirements:
May 1972, the requirements of paragraphs 25,812 (f) and (g) of RBAC 25, effective on April 30,
1972;
May 1972, the external emergency lighting requirements under which the aircraft was
certificate.
non-slip, which meets the following requirements:
1972, the requirements of paragraph 25,803 (e) of RBAC 25, effective April 30, 1972;
May 1972, the escape path requirements under which the aircraft was certified.
be 112 cm (44 in.) or more tall and 51 cm (20 in.) or wider but no longer
117 cm (46 in.) wide, each ventral passenger exit (except the ventral exits of airplanes)
M-404 and CV-240) and each exit through the tail cone must meet the requirements for
emergency at the floor level of this section. However, ANAC may authorize deviations from this
paragraph, provided that it is judged that special circumstances make full compliance with the
impractical and that an acceptable level of security can be maintained.
exceeding the required minimum number of emergency exits must comply with all applicable
provisions of this section, except paragraphs (f) (1), (2) and (3), and must be readily accessible.
by the tail cone should be:
near the exit opening device, stating that it cannot be opened in flight.
that the aircraft is equipped with portable flashlights kept in readily accessible places from each
commissioner's seat.
October 1987 and having a set of emergency exits installed and approved before the
said date, on an airplane for which there is a requirement for more than one emergency exit to
passengers on each side of the fuselage, no passenger emergency exit may be
located more than 18 m (60 feet) from any other passenger emergency exit of the same
side and in the same fuselage cabin, this distance being measured parallel to the longitudinal axis
of the plane between the ends closest to the exits.
<EOS>
121,311 Seats, seat belts and shoulder belts
cruise and landing:
years old. However, two people using the same bed or two people sitting in a
a double chair or sofa can only wear a single approved seat belt when cruising.
on board an airplane operated under this regulation must occupy an approved seat or bed,
with an individual seat belt properly adjusted over your body, during
ground movements, takeoffs and landings. The seat belt provided for the occupant of a vehicle
seat cannot be used by more than one person. Notwithstanding this requirement, a child can:
child has not yet reached the age of two and does not occupy or use any safety device.
containment; or
for children provided by the certificate holder or one of the persons referred to in paragraph
parents or guardian to ensure the safety of the child during the flight;
evidencing its approval for aeronautical use by a country affiliated to ICAO; and
the plane or an approved bed;
may exceed the limit weight set for the system; and
to certificate holders:
unapproved restraint system during takeoffs, landings and movements on the ground;
may prohibit a child, if required by a parent, guardian or authorized caregiver,
occupies a containment system provided by its responsible, provided that:
certificate holder has given an approved seat or bed to be used by the child;
authorized children or, consistent with operational safety practices, determine the
location of the most appropriate seat to secure the child restraint system.
RBAC 25.
certificate can authorize the landing and take-off of an airplane, unless each passenger seat
have your back in an upright position. Each passenger must follow the instructions given by a
crew member, in order to comply with this paragraph.
not vertical, to comply with the provisions of 121,310 (f) (3);
cannot sit upright for medical reasons and are being transported in accordance with
with the procedures set out in the certificate holder's manual, provided that the backrest of the
seat does not obstruct any passenger access to the corridors or any emergency exit.
January 1958 or an airplane not included in the transport category that was manufactured after 20
March 1997, unless it is equipped, at each cockpit station, with a
seat belt combined with shoulder belts that meet the requirements
applicable provisions of section 25,785 of RBAC 25, effective March 6, 1980, except that:
approved and installed before March 6, 1980 can continue to be used; and
safety measures designed for the inertial load factors established according to the
airplane certification.
landings and that meets the requirements of section 25,785 of RBAC 25, effective March 6, 1980,
except that:
installed before March 6, 1980 can continue to be used; and
safety measures designed for the inertial load factors established according to the
airplane certification;
occupied by commissioners not required by 121,391 (c) or (d), as applicable.
shoulder should have the set properly adjusted and locked during landings and takeoffs,
except that a shoulder belt that is not combined with a seat belt can be loosened
if the occupant cannot perform the required tasks with the shoulder belt adjusted
be safe so as not to interfere with crew members in carrying out their duties or leaving
occupants in an emergency.
certified on or after January 1, 1958 and manufactured on or after October 27, 2009 in
operations carrying passengers under this regulation, unless all passenger seats are
passengers and flight attendants of the airplane meet the requirements of section 25,562 of RBHA 25,
effective June 16, 1988 or after.
<EOS>
121,312 Interior materials
transport category certified before January 1, 1965. Except for materials
covered by paragraph (b) of this section, all materials in each cabin or
transport category airplanes, and airplanes not included in the certified type transport category before
January 1, 1965, used by crew or passengers must meet the requirements of the
paragraph 25.853 of RBAC 25 in effect on the dates below or as subsequently amended:
provided for in paragraph (a) (3) (ii) of this section, each airplane with a maximum capacity of twenty or more
passenger seats and built after August 20, 1988, but before August 20, 1990,
must comply with the provisions for the heat release ratio test set out in paragraph
25,853 (d) effective on March 6, 1995 (formerly 25,853 (a-1) in effect on August 20, 1986)
minutes of sample exposure cannot exceed 100 kilowatt-minutes per square meter and the
peak heat release ratio cannot exceed 100 kilowatts per square meter;
more passenger seats and built on or after August 20, 1990 should meet the
provisions for the heat and smoke release ratio test set out in paragraph 25.853 (d)
effective March 6, 1995 (formerly 25,853 (a-1) in effect on September 26, 1988) (See
Appendix L of this regulation).
May 1972. Except as provided in paragraphs (a) (3) (i) or (a) (3) (ii) of this section, each aircraft
for which the type certification application was submitted before May 1, 1972 must
comply with the provisions of 25,853 effective on April 30, 1972, regardless of the capacity to
passengers, if there is a substantially complete overhaul of the cabin after April 30
1972;
May 1, 1972. Except as provided in paragraphs (a) (3) (i) or (a) (3) (ii) of this section, each
aircraft for which the type certification application was submitted on or after May 1
1972 must meet the requirements for materials against which the airplane has been certified,
independent of passenger capacity, if there is a substantially complete overhaul of the
inside the cabin on or after that date.
passengers of twenty or more seats;
1995. Except as provided for in paragraph (a) (3) (ii) of this section, each airplane of type certified after
January 1, 1958, with a maximum capacity for passengers of twenty or more seats, if you suffer
a substantially complete replacement of cabin interior components identified in
25,853 (d) effective on or after March 6, 1995, must meet the provisions of the
heat release established by 25,853 (d), effective on March 6, 1995 (former 25,853 (a-
1) in force on August 20, 1986) (see Appendix L of this regulation), except that the total heat
released during the first 2 minutes of sample exposure cannot exceed 100 kilowatt-
minute per square meter and the peak heat release ratio cannot exceed 100 kilowatts
per square meter;
1990. Each airplane of type certified after January 1, 1958, with a maximum capacity for
passengers of twenty or more seats, must meet the provisions of the
heat and smoke established by 25,853 (d), effective March 6, 1995 (formerly 25,853 (a-1)
effective September 26, 1988) (see Appendix L of this regulation), if there is a substitution
substantially complete of cabin interior components identified in paragraph
25,853 (d) on or after August 20, 1990.
cabin that does not meet applicable flammability and smoke emission requirements, if applicable
verified that there are special circumstances that make compliance with the
those paragraphs. Such diversion concessions are limited to those planes manufactured within 1
year after the applicable date set out in this section and to those airplanes on which the cabin interior has been
renewed within 1 year after those dates. The petition for such deviations must include an analysis
complete and detailed description of each component subject to paragraph 25.853 (a-1), the proposed steps to
achieve full compliance with this section and, for the few components for which it will not be
compliance was obtained within the established deadline, plausible reasons for such occurrence;
do not meet the flammability and smoke emission requirements of paragraph 25.853 (d) in effect
on March 6, 1995 (formerly 25,853 (a-1)), can be used on an airplane that must meet
to paragraphs (a) (1) (i), (a) (1) (ii), (a) (3) (i) or (a) (3) (ii) of this section, provided that such trolleys and
in each part of the cabin occupied by passengers or crew, they must meet the requirements for
seat cushions of 25,853 (c) effective on November 26, 1984 as follows:
certified type after December 31, 1964.
which the requirements of paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section do not apply, the materials and pads
of seats in each part of the cabin used by crew and passengers must meet the requirements
applicable according to which the airplane had the certified type.
after January 1, 1958:
replace the materials for thermal acoustic insulation of the fuselage after September 2, 2006, the
new materials must meet the flame propagation requirements of section 25.856 of the RBAC
25 effective on September 2, 2003;
airframe installed in the fuselage must meet the flame propagation requirements of the section
25,856 of the RBAC 25 effective on September 2, 2003;
2009, thermo-acoustic insulation materials installed in the lower half of the fuselage should
meet the flame penetration resistance requirements of section 25.856 of the effective RBAC 25
on September 2, 2003.
<EOS>
121,313 Miscellaneous equipment
No one may conduct any operation unless the following equipment is installed on the
plane:
spare parts, duly indicated in the certificate holder's manual;
sections 25.1309, 25.1331, 25.1351 (a) and (b) (1) through (4), 25.1353, 25.1355 and 25.1431 (b) of RBAC 25,
or that is capable of producing and distributing energy to the required instruments and equipment
with an extra power source, if either an energy source or component of the basic power system
power distribution fails. The use of elements common to both systems can be approved,
provided it is considered that they have been designed to be reasonably protected
against defects. Power sources driven by the motors, when used, must be installed in
different engines;
Requested;
point where it is less affected by the variation in air flow, humidity and other
foreign materials and installed in such a way as to be hermetically sealed, unless the outlet is
pressure. When there are provisions to transfer an instrument from its primary
operation for an alternating system, such provisions should include a control device
positively marked to clearly indicate which system is being used;
“control system”, with a locking device that prevents passengers from entering the
command without their permission. For airplanes equipped with a rest area for
crew located between the control cabin and the passenger cabin and with doors for each
of these areas, the door with such a locking device must be the one that connects the rest area
crew members to the passenger cabin;
emergency exit provisions. Such keys must be readily available for each
crew member, including that of the cockpit door. However, on airplanes that must meet the
established in paragraph (j) of this section, unless a person is designated to perform tasks in the
cockpit, no one can have a key in this area;
indicate that it must remain open during takeoffs and landings;
normally accessible to passengers and which can be locked by them (washbasins, for example);
aircraft that paragraph (f) of this section must have a “cockpit door”, which
have a maximum approved take-off weight above 45,500 kg or a maximum configuration
more than 60 seats for passengers who are engaged or who intend to engage in flights
international; and for cargo transport aircraft that have a door between the cabin
flight crew and any other area occupied by persons who are engaged or
intend to engage in international flights:
on January 15, 2002; and
in the cockpit in the event that a flight crew member is disabled. Any
confirmation system and associated signals must be possible to be put into practice by each
flight crew member sitting at his workstation.
section, but which operate exclusively within Brazil, the implementation of the modifications to meet
referred to paragraph (j) must be made according to the schedule to be established when ANAC
deem necessary or convenient.
international aircraft with aircraft not equipped with the safety devices required by these
paragraphs, provided that the countries of overflight and destination accept such operations. In contrast, the
ANAC accepts the overflight and landing of airplanes from these countries without requiring the aforementioned
safety.
<EOS>
121,314 Cargo and luggage compartments
For each certified transport category airplane after January 1, 1958:
effective on June 16, 1986 (see Appendix L of this regulation), having an internal volume
greater than 5.7 m3 (200 ft3) must have ceiling and wall covering panels that are
built with:
1989.
design characteristics, such as joints or fasteners, that may affect the capacity of the
cover to contain fire, safely;
Class D, of any volume, must meet the standards of 25,857 (c) and 25,858 of the RBAC 25 for
Class C compartments, unless the operation is a cargo-only operation,
when, then, each Class D compartment must meet the requirements of 25,857 (e) for
Class E compartments;
March 2005;
this regulation have been converted or reconfigured with a detection and suppression system
appropriate, each certificate holder must submit periodic written reports to ANAC,
containing the information specified below:
certificate holder for operations under this regulation in which all compartments
Class D have been converted to Class C or Class E compartments;
certificate holder for operations under this regulation in which all compartments
Class D have been reconfigured to meet Class III detection and suppression requirements
C or Class E fire detection requirements; and
certificate holder for operations under this regulation in which there is at least one
Class D compartment that has not been converted or reconfigured.
July 2001 and, thereafter, every 3-month interval.
<EOS>
121.315 Control cabin verification procedures
of control for each type of airplane operated by it.
to ensure safety before the engines start, during take-off and landing and in emergencies of the
engines and systems. Procedures must be designed in such a way as to prevent crew members from
flight need to rely on their memories to check each item.
mandatory reading and flight crew members must follow them when operating the aircraft.
<EOS>
121,316 Fuel tanks
Each transport category airplane with turbine engines and being operated after October 30, 1991
must comply with the requirements of paragraph 25,963 (e) effective October 30, 1989.
<EOS>
121,317 Passenger information requirements. Smoking bans and requirements
additional seat belts
that it be equipped with the passenger notices provided for in section 25.791 of RBAC 25. Except
as provided for in paragraph (l) of this section, notices must be constructed in such a way that
crew members can switch them on and off. The notices, when written, must be in Portuguese, being
acceptable to repeat them in English.
be lit during each movement on the surface, at each takeoff and each landing and at any
time when deemed necessary by the pilot in command.
whatever the flight time in the segment. "Do not smoke" (or similar) notices must be
lit throughout the flight, or one or more "no smoking" (or similar) signs in compliance with
section 25.1541 of RBAC 25 must be visible throughout the flight. If they are used
simultaneously light signs and warnings, warnings must remain on throughout the segment
flight. (New wording given by Resolution No. 262, of January 29, 2013, published in the Diário
Union Official of January 31, 2013, Section 1, page 11).
that he has at least one sign or scoreboard with the phrase "Keep belts tied while
seated "(or equivalent) that is visible from each seat to passengers. Such a sign or scoreboard does not
must comply with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section.
sign with the following words (or equivalent): “It is forbidden to prevent, or try to prevent, the
functioning of the smoke detector of this washbasin ”. These notices or signs are not required to
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section.
you must fasten and adjust your seat belt while the "belt fastening" warnings are on.
any lavatory on an airplane.
lit from boarding to disembarking passengers.
paragraphs (f), (g), (h) and (i) of this section.
certified after December 31, 1964 and that was manufactured before December 20, 1964
1997, if it is equipped with at least one sign, which is legible for each person sitting in the
passenger cabin, informing “tie belts” and if during any movement on the surface, in
each takeoff, each landing and whenever deemed necessary by the pilot in command,
one of the crew members verbally instructs passengers to fasten and adjust their seat belts.
<EOS>
121,318 Passenger warning system
No one can operate an airplane with a passenger configuration with more than 19 seats, unless
that the airplane is equipped with a sound warning system for passengers, which:
121,319 (a), except for microphones, headphones, switches and signaling devices.
command.
flight attendant seat, there is a microphone, readily accessible to the flight attendant while
seated, except that a microphone can serve more than one output as long as the proximity of such
exits allow direct verbal communication between the commissioners sitting at their posts.
possible and go into operation, all within 10 seconds.
Commissioners' work.
requirements of section 25.1423 of RBAC 25.
<EOS>
121,319 Crew intercom system
unless the airplane is equipped with an intercom system for the crew, which:
121,318 (a), except for headphones, microphones, selection switches and signaling devices;
and
approved in accordance with section 21,305 of RBAC 21 and meet the following requirements:
command;
flight attendant in each area of ​​the passenger cabin;
where this is possible and everything goes into operation within 10 seconds;
such that all emergency exits at floor level (or access to such exits when
they are between two galleys), in each area of ​​the passenger cabin, are visible from a
or more of the positions equipped with the system;
routes, for use by flight attendants and flight attendants;
the person receiving a call can distinguish a normal call from a call from
emergency;
between ground personnel and at least two crewman positions in the cockpit. The position
of the intercom system for use by ground personnel should be located so as to allow, when
such a situation is necessary, that personnel using that position can do so without being visible from the inside
of the plane.
<EOS>
121,321 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,323 Instruments and equipment for night operation
equipped with the following instruments and equipment, in addition to those required by 121,305
up to 121,321 and 121,803:
certified type transport category after December 31, 1964;
switch or similar device required easily legible and installed in order to prevent lightning strikes
direct light hits the eyes of flight crew members or causes light reflections
undesirable effects inside the cabin. There must be a means of controlling the intensity of the illumination, unless
that it is demonstrated that the fixed intensity is satisfactory in all conditions;
equivalent of preventing ice malfunctions;
altimeter ").
<EOS>
121,325 Instruments and equipment for IFR operations
be equipped with the following instruments and equipment, in addition to those required by 121,305
up to 121,321 and 121,803:
equivalent of preventing ice malfunctions;
altimeter ");
switch or similar device required easily legible and installed in order to prevent lightning strikes
direct light hits the eyes of flight crew members or causes light reflections
undesirable effects inside the cabin. There must be a means of controlling the intensity of illumination, unless
that it is demonstrated that the fixed intensity is satisfactory in all conditions.
<EOS>
121,327 Supplemental oxygen: airplanes with conventional engines
no one can operate an airplane unless supplemental oxygen is supplied and used as
established in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. The amount of supplemental oxygen required
for a particular operation is determined based on the altitude and duration of the flight, in a way
consistent with the operational procedures established for each operation and route.
provided and used by all flight crew members in service in the flight deck and must be
provided to other crew members during parts of the flight at said altitudes with a duration of
more than 30 minutes;
by all flight crew members in service in the cockpit and other crew members during
all flight time at such altitudes;
continuously, except when it is necessary to remove the oxygen mask or other device
used in connection with your normal tasks. Reserve crew members, who will enter service in the
cockpit before the end of the flight, they must receive an amount of oxygen equal to the
other crew members on duty other than those in the cockpit. The reserve crew member who does not
entering service in the cockpit until the end of the flight must be considered as a passenger
with regard to the supply of supplemental oxygen.
passengers according to the following:
enough oxygen for 10% of passengers for 30 minutes;
enough oxygen for 30% of passengers during the entire flight at these altitudes;
each passenger on board for the entire duration of the flight at these altitudes.
pressure inside the airplane and "flight altitude" means the altitude above the average sea level in
that the plane is being operated. For airplanes without pressurized cabins, the terms "air pressure altitude
cabin "and" flight altitude "are equivalent.
<EOS>
121,329 Supplemental oxygen for subsistence. Aircraft with turbine engines
that aircraft with subsistence oxygen and its distribution equipment as
established in this section:
comply with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section;
particular operation in order to comply with the rules of this regulation must be determined based on
altitude, cabin pressure and flight duration, consistent with operating procedures
established for each operation and for each route;
cabin pressure and the hypothesis that a failure in the cabin pressurization may occur at altitude
or point of flight that is most critical from the point of view of the need for oxygen and that, after
failure, the airplane will descend according to the emergency procedure established in the AFM, without
exceed your operational limitations, to an altitude that allows you to successfully complete the flight;
flight, unless it is demonstrated that no probable failure of equipment of the
pressurization will result in cabin pressure altitude equal to the flight altitude. In these circumstances,
the maximum attainable cabin pressure altitude can be used as a basis for certification, or for
determining the oxygen supply, or both.
crew members according to the following:
oxygen supplied and used by all crew members on duty in the cockpit;
for the rest of the crew members, oxygen must be provided during the part of the flight in which the
stay at these altitudes is greater than 30 minutes;
by all crew members on duty in the cockpit and other crew members during
the entire length of stay at these altitudes;
except when it is necessary to remove the mask or other supply system depending on the
compliance with its regular obligations. Reserve crew members who will enter service in the cabin
of command before the end of the flight must receive an amount of oxygen equal to the others
crew members on duty other than those in the cockpit. The reserve crew member entering service
in the cockpit until the end of the flight is considered a passenger with respect to the
supplemental oxygen supply.
passengers according to the following:
enough oxygen for 10% of passengers during the part of the flight in which
altitudes exceed 30 minutes;
enough oxygen for 30% of passengers during the entire flight at these altitudes;
each passenger on board for the entire duration of the flight at these altitudes.
<EOS>
121,331 Supplemental oxygen requirements for airplanes with a pressurized cabin. Airplanes with
conventional engines
must equip the airplane to meet the requirements of paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section at the event
of a pressurization failure.
provide enough oxygen for each crew member for the entire flight at such altitudes and no less than one
2-hour supply for each flight crew member in service in the cockpit. The supply
required for two hours is that amount of oxygen needed for a proper descent
constant from the maximum operating altitude approved for the airplane up to 10,000 feet in 10 minutes
and followed by 110 minutes at 10,000 feet. The oxygen required by section 121.337 can be
considered in determining the supplemental breathing supply required by the crew
flight in service in the cockpit in the event of a failure in the cabin pressurization
provide oxygen as follows:
10% of passengers if at any point along the route to be flown the plane can descend with
safety to an altitude of 14,000 feet, or less, within 4 minutes;
minutes, the following oxygen supply must be provided:
feet, the oxygen supply required by 121,327 (c) (3);
oxygen required by 121,327 (c) (2);
30 minutes for 10% of passengers.
10% of passengers throughout the flight (including emergency descent) above 8,000 feet to
14,000 feet inclusive and to serve 121,327 (c) (2) and (3) for flight above 14,000 feet.
critical of the flight from the point of view of the need for oxygen and that after the failure the plane will descend,
without exceeding their normal operating limitations, for altitudes that allow safe flight in the
regards the separation of the terrain.
<EOS>
121.333 Supplemental oxygen for emergency descents and first aid.
Pressurized aircraft with turbine engines
must supply oxygen and its distribution devices, in order to meet the requirements
paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section in the event of a pressurization failure.
provide enough oxygen to fulfill 121,329, but not less than a 2-hour supply
for each crew member on duty in the cockpit. The supply required for 2 hours is that
amount of oxygen needed during an airplane descent from its maximum flight altitude
certified operation up to 10,000 feet, with constant descent rate for 10 minutes, followed by
110 minutes of flight at 10,000 feet. The oxygen required by 121,337, in the event of a
pressurization, can be included in the determination of the quantity required for flight crew members in
service in the cockpit.
The cockpit must have an oxygen mask designed to allow placement
fast on the face and that, when placed, firm and adjust to the face starting to supply oxygen
on demand; the design of the mask must also allow that, when placed on the face, it does not prevent
immediate intercommunication on the plane. The mask must be kept ready for use and located
within the immediate reach of the crew member in his normal work station, when not being
used;
must put on and wear an appropriately adjusted oxygen mask and supply oxygen according to
with the following:
individual quick-placement and the certificate holder demonstrates that they can be withdrawn
of their receptacles and placed on the face and immediately start operating, duly safe
and adjusted, in 5 seconds and using only one hand, a pilot does not need to put on and use the
oxygen mask on flights below the following flight levels, including:
excluding any crew member seats or a payload capacity of more than 7,500 pounds,
below FL 410 inclusive;
excluding any crew member seats or a payload capacity of 7,500 pounds or
less, below FL 350 inclusive.
with this section, the certificate holder must demonstrate that the mask can be worn without
disturb the crewman's glasses and without delaying him in carrying out his duties in emergencies.
Once put on, the mask cannot prevent immediate intercommunication between the crew and
other plane crew members through the entire intercom system of the plane.
It is necessary for a pilot to leave his post at the controls of the airplane in operations above flight level
350 (FL350), the pilot remaining at the controls must put on and wear his oxygen mask until the
return of the other pilot;
oxygen to make sure the oxygen mask is working, adjust accordingly,
is connected to the terminals of the oxygen delivery device and that the amount and pressure
of oxygen are suitable for use.
flight level 250, you must carry portable oxygen equipment with a supply for at least
15 minutes, unless it is demonstrated that sufficient portable
oxygen with masks distributed throughout the passenger cabin or masks and
spare oxygen outlets throughout the cabin to ensure immediate availability
of oxygen to each flight attendant, regardless of their position when depressurization occurs.
cabin.
The following oxygen supply, for use by passengers in the passenger cabin, must be provided:
able to safely descend, at any point on the route to be flown, to a flight altitude of
14,000 feet or less within 4 minutes, there must be oxygen for at least 10% of occupants
of the passenger cabin, supplied at the rate established by this regulation, for a period of
30 minute period;
safety to an altitude of 14,000 feet in 4 minutes and in operations above flight level 250,
there must be oxygen available to no less than 10% of the occupants, provided at the rate
established by this regulation, during the entire flight time in which the cabin pressure altitude,
after depressurization occurs, remain above 10,000 feet up to and including 14,000 feet. Oxygen
must also be sufficient to comply with the provisions of paragraphs 121.329 (c) (2) and (3) of this
Regulation, as applicable. However, in no case can the oxygen supply be less
necessary to meet 10 minutes of supply for all occupants of the
passengers;
may require pure oxygen after lowering cabin pressure altitudes above the level
250, an oxygen supply must be provided in accordance with paragraph 25.1443 (d) of the RBAC
25, sufficient for supply during the entire flight time at cabin pressure altitudes above
8,000 feet, after the pressurization failure, to 2% of the occupants (minimum of 1 person). So that
Commissioners can apply this oxygen the certificate holder must provide a number
distribution units, in no case less than 2.
a crew member should instruct passengers on the need to use oxygen in the event of a
depressurization of the cabin, show them the location of the oxygen distribution units and
demonstrate how to use them.
<EOS>
121,335 Oxygen equipment standard
oxygen and the amounts of oxygen to meet 121,327 must meet the standards
established by the certifying authority, the standards set by the section being generally accepted
4b.651 of the "Civil Air Regulations", effective July 20, 1950, in the United States; However,
if the certificate holder demonstrates that full compliance with such standards is impracticable, the
ANAC may authorize modifications to them as long as an equivalent level of
safety.
and the amounts of oxygen to meet 121,329 and 121,333 must meet the standards
established by the certifying authority, the standards set by the section being generally accepted
4b.651 of the "Civil Air Regulations", effective September 1, 1958, in the United States;
however, if the certificate holder demonstrates that full compliance with such standards is
impracticable, ANAC may authorize modifications to them as long as a level is provided
security equivalent.
<EOS>
121.337 Protective breathing equipment (PBE)
meeting the equipment, breathable gas and communications requirements contained in paragraph (b)
this section.
transport, unless protective breathing equipment is provided, taking into account the
requirements in this section, as follows:
the effects of smoke, carbon dioxide or other harmful gases, or oxygen deficiency
caused by reasons other than cabin depressurization. It must also protect the crew
the above effects when they are fighting fires on board the plane;
inspection established by the equipment manufacturer, in order to ensure its conditions of
continuous availability and immediate ability to fulfill its purposes in the event of a
emergency. Inspection periods can be modified, as long as the certificate holder
demonstrate that such modification will provide an equivalent level of security;
extension that prevents you from performing your duties as a crew member and should allow the use of glasses
without impairing your vision and without losing the protection required by paragraph (b) (1) of this section;
radio equipment on the plane and communicate with each other, in their normal work stations,
through the intercom system. The equipment must also allow the use of the
intercommunication between at least two cockpit stations and at least one flight station
flight attendant in each area of ​​the passenger cabin;
aircraft intercom, from any flight attendant station referred to in paragraph (b) (4)
this section;
supplement, provided that it meets the standards for oxygen equipment in section 121.335 of this
regulation;
protective breathing equipment are as follows:
8,000 feet, for:
operation and its possible effects on other components;
there is a means that allows the crew member to determine promptly, during the pre-flight of the equipment
described in paragraph (c) of this section, if the gas system is fully refilled;
requirements of paragraphs 25.1450 (b) and (c) of RBAC 25.
fixed or portable breathable gas, meeting the requirements of this section, should be conveniently
located in the cockpit and must be easily accessible for immediate use from the
work of each of the required flight crew;
certified after December 31, 1964, breathing protective equipment, with a reservoir of
portable breathable gas, meeting the requirements of this section, must be conveniently located
and easily accessible for immediate use by crew members fighting fires, as follows:
cargo compartment;
special circumstances make such a location impractical and the proposed change can provide a
equivalent level of security;
However, ANAC can authorize deviations from this requirement, allowing it to locate equipment at
more than 90 cm (3 feet) of a required portable fire extinguisher, if special circumstances
make such a location impractical and the proposed location can provide a level of security
equivalent.
checked by the respective crew member, in order to ensure that:
working, adjusts to the face properly (unless it’s the universal fit type), is
connected to the supply terminals and the amount and pressure of the breathing gas are adequate
for use; and
face properly (unless it is the universal fit type).
checked by a crew member for that purpose, aiming to ensure that each one is
properly stored and in operation and, for systems other than those of chemical generation of
oxygen, the respirable gas tank is completely full. Each certificate holder must
designate, in your manual, at least one crew member to perform such checks prior to the first
takeoff each day.
<EOS>
121,339 Emergency equipment for operations over large areas of water
require the transportation on board of only a few of the specific items listed below for operations
over large stretches of water or, at the request of the certificate holder, ANAC allows
deviations for a particular operation over large stretches of water, no holder of
certificate can operate an airplane in the aforementioned operations without the airplane having the following
equipment on board:
plane occupant;
nominal buoyancy and sufficient seating capacity to accommodate all occupants of the aircraft.
Unless excess boats with sufficient capacity are provided, there must be capacity
sufficient float and seat rating to accommodate all aircraft occupants at the event
the loss of the largest capacity dinghy on board the aircraft;
under operational conditions, which meets the requirements of paragraphs 91.207 (c) and (g) of RBAC no.
91. (Wording provided by Resolution No. 546, of March 18, 2020)
accessible in the event of a mooring, without appreciable time for preparatory procedures. You
Equipment must be installed, and clearly marked, in approved locations.
placed inside each required boat. (Wording given by Resolution No. 468, of May 4, 2018)
a point more than 370 km (200 nautical miles) from the nearest mainland.
<EOS>
121.340 Floating media required
operation on water, unless it is equipped with life jackets, in accordance with
121,339 (a) (1), or with another approved flotation device, for each of its occupants.
These devices must be within reach of each seated occupant and must be easily accessible.
removed from the plane.
water without the life jackets or flotation devices required by paragraph (a) of this
section, provided that the certificate holder demonstrates that the extent of water over which the airplane is going
operating is not of the size and depth that require such equipment for the survival of the
occupants in the event of a mooring.
<EOS>
121,341 Equipment for operation in icy conditions
certified in accordance with the requirements of the category of transport relating to protection against ice, or
unless the airplane is an airplane not included in the transport category, of a certified type after 31
December 1964, which has ice protection provisions in accordance with section 34 of the Appendix
As with the RBAC 135, no one can operate a plane in icy conditions without it
is equipped with devices to prevent the formation or de-icing of windshields,
wings, warps, propellers and other parts where ice formation could adversely affect the
airplane security.
have the means to illuminate or otherwise determine the formation of ice in the most
wing criticisms from this point of view. The lighting to be used must not cause glare or
reflexes that jeopardize the performance of the crew's obligations.
Except for an airplane that has ice protection provisions in accordance with section 34 of the Appendix
That of the RBAC 135 or for those of a certified type in the transport category, no one can operate:
that the airplane has, in operation, de-icing / anti-icing equipment protecting each propeller,
windshield, wing, stabilizer or control surface and each
speed, altitude, rate of climb and flight attitude; or
pilot-in-command, indicate that the predicted ice formation conditions that could prevent
the flight will no longer be found due to changes in weather conditions that occurred after the
forecast time, the restrictions in paragraph (c) of this section, based on forecast conditions,
do not apply.
<EOS>
121.342 Pitot heating indication system
No one can operate a transport category aircraft or, after December 20, 2007, a non-transport aircraft
included in the category transport of certified type after December 31, 1964, which is equipped
with a heated pitot tube flight instrument system, unless it is also
equipped with a system for indicating the functioning of said heating that meets the
provisions of section 25.1326 of RBAC 25, effective April 12, 1978.
<EOS>
121,343 Flight data recorder
a large airplane of a type certified to operate above 25,000 feet in altitude or that has engines
the turbine, unless it is equipped with one or more approved flight data recorders, which
record data from which the following information can be determined within the ranges,
recording accuracy and intervals specified in Appendix B of this regulation:
including, for operations above 25,000 feet of altitude, or an airplane with turbine type engines
certified before the same date, unless it is equipped, before May 26, 1989, with
one or more approved flight data recorders, using digital techniques to record and
conserve data and allow a prompt recovery of the data saved in the recording. At
The following information must be able to be determined within the ranges, precision and intervals of
recording specified in Appendix B of this regulation:
equipped before May 26, 1994 with one or more approved flight data recorders, which
use digital techniques to record and store data and allow prompt recovery of data
data saved in the recording. The following information must be able to be determined within the
ranges, accuracy and recording intervals specified in Appendix B of this regulation:
built after May 26, 1989, as well as an airplane specified in paragraph (a) of this section
of a certified type after September 30, 1969, unless that airplane is equipped with one or more
more approved flight data recorders, using digital techniques to record and preserve
data and that allow a prompt recovery of the data saved in the recording. The following
information must be able to be determined within the recording ranges, accuracy and intervals
specified in Appendix B of this regulation:
For the purposes of this section, the date of manufacture of an airplane is the date on which the
manufacturing inspections show that the plane was considered finished and complied with the design of
approved type.
digital unit for acquisition of flight data ARINC 717 (DFDAU), or equivalent, unless
it is equipped with one or more approved flight data recorders, using techniques
to record and store data and allow prompt recovery of stored data
recording. Any parameter specified in Appendix B of this regulation and which is
available in the digital data bar must be recorded within the ranges, precision, resolutions and
specified sampling intervals.
built after that same date, or an airplane specified in paragraph (a) of this type section
certified after September 30, 1969 and manufactured after October 11, 1991, unless it
be equipped with one or more flight data recorders that use digital techniques to record
and conserve data and allow a prompt recovery of the data saved in the recording. You
parameters specified in Appendix B of this regulation must be recorded within the ranges,
specified precision, resolution and sampling intervals.
continuously at least from the moment the airplane starts the takeoff run until the
the instant he completes the landing run at an aerodrome.
authorized by this paragraph, each certificate holder shall retain the recordings established
in paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section, as appropriate, for at least 25 hours of time
of operation specified in 121,359 (a). A total of 1 hour of recording can be erased with the
purpose of testing the flight recorder or the recorder system. Data deleted according to this
paragraph must be the oldest existing at the time of testing. Except as provided for in
paragraph (i) of this section, no record needs to be kept for more than 60 days.
result at the end of the flight, the certificate holder must remove the recording from the plane and retain the
recorded data required by paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section, as appropriate, by a
60-day period, unless a longer period is determined by ANAC.
requirements of section 25.1459 of RBAC 25, effective August 31, 1977. The required correlation
by paragraph 25.1459 (c) need only be established on 1 plane of any group of planes:
of the first pilot associated with the flight recorder. The latest sensor calibration,
including the recording from which this calibration was derived must be retained by the holder
of certificate.
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section, as appropriate, must have an approved device
to help your location when submerged.
<EOS>
121,344 Digital flight data recorders for transport category airplanes
a transport category airplane with turbine engines unless it is equipped with
one or more approved flight data recorders using digital techniques to record and
save data and a method for promptly retrieving the data saved in the recording. You
Operational parameters that must be recorded by digital flight data recorders are those
bellow. The phrase “when the information source is installed” following a parameter indicates that
a modification to the installed equipment is not required just to record this parameter.
magnetic);
the parameters of paragraph (a) (85) of this section apply);
the parameters of paragraph (a) (86) of this section apply);
parameters of paragraph (a) (87) of this section);
including "autothrottle";
installed);
installed);
installed);
installed);
of 1991, on August 20, 2005:
(FDAU), the parameters listed in paragraphs (a) (1) through (a) (18) of this section must be
recorded within the ranges and precision specified in Appendix B of this regulation, and:
required, unless the existing recorder has sufficient capacity to record it;
of them, from a single source.
flight (FDAU), the parameters listed in paragraphs (a) (1) through (a) (22) of this section must be
recorded within the ranges, accuracy and recording intervals specified in Appendix M of this
regulation. The parameters listed from (a) (12) to (a) (17) can be recorded, each of them, from
a single source;
as early as practicable, but not later than the next major maintenance inspection to
be held between August 18, 2003 and August 20, 2005. It is considered to be a major
maintenance inspection any schedule that keeps the aircraft out of service for 4 days or
more and that includes access to large structural components.
from 1991:
and with an ARINC 717 digital flight data acquisition unit (DFDAU) or equivalent, the
parameters specified in paragraphs (a) (1) to (a) (22) of this section must be recorded within
the ranges, accuracy, resolutions and recording intervals specified in Appendix M of this
regulation on August 20, 2005. The parameters listed from (a) (12) to (a) (14) can be
recorded, each of them, from a single source;
all additional parameters for which information sources are installed and linked to the
recording system must be recorded within the ranges, precision, resolutions and intervals of
recording specified in Appendix M of this regulation on August 20, 2005;
must continue to be met until compliance with paragraph (c) (1) of this section is achieved.
from 1991:
within the ranges, accuracy, resolution and recording intervals specified in Appendix M of this
regulation on August 20, 2005. The parameters listed from (a) (12) to (a) (14) can be
recorded, each of them, from a single source;
for which information sources are installed and connected to the recording system must be
recorded within the ranges, accuracy, resolution and recording intervals specified in the
Appendix M of this regulation on August 20, 2005.
2000:
within the ranges, accuracy, resolution and recording intervals specified in Appendix M of this
regulation;
for which information sources are installed and connected to the recording system must be
recorded within the ranges, accuracy, resolution and recording intervals specified in the
Appendix M of this regulation.
2002, the parameters listed in paragraphs (a) (1) through (a) (88) of this section must be recorded
within the ranges, accuracy, resolution and recording intervals specified in Appendix M of this
regulation.
be operated continuously from the moment the airplane starts the takeoff run until
complete the landing roll.
authorized by this paragraph, each certificate holder shall retain the recordings established
in this section, as appropriate, for at least 25 hours of the operating time specified in
121,359 (a). A total of 1 hour of recording can be erased for the purpose of testing the recorder
flight or the recorder system. Any erasure made in accordance with this paragraph must be
of the oldest data existing at the time of testing. Except as provided for in paragraph (i) of this
section, no recording needs to be kept for more than 60 days.
result at the end of the flight, the certificate holder must remove the recording from the plane and retain the
recorded data required by this section, as appropriate, for a period of 60 days, unless
a longer period is determined by ANAC.
paragraphs 25.1459 (a), (b), (d) and (e) of RBAC 25. A correlation should be established between the
values ​​recorded by the flight data recorder and the corresponding values ​​being measured. THE
correlation must contain a sufficient number of points to allow an accurate conversion
of the values ​​recorded in engineering units or discrete states, over the entire operating range
of the parameter. Except for airplanes having separate speed and altitude sensors that are part of
integral of the flight data recording system, a single correlation can be established for a
group of planes:
associated with the flight data recorder system. Sufficient documentation to convert
data recorded in engineering units or discrete values ​​specified in the applicable appendix
must be retained by the certificate holder.
help your location when submerged.
comply with this section but must continue to comply with the applicable paragraphs of 121,343 of this
regulation, as appropriate:
ICAO) and that are subject to paragraph 91.805 (b) of RBAC 91, until January 1, 2005. In
or after January 1, 2005, any Stage 2 aircraft authorized to operate by RBAC 91 must be
complies with the applicable flight data recorder requirements of this section for the airplane
involved;
General Dynamics Convair 640, deHavilland Aircraft Company Ltd. DHC-7, Fairchild Industries FH
227, Fokker F-27 (except Mark 50), F-28 Mark 1000 and Mark 4000, Gulfstream Aerospace G-159,
Jetstream 4100 series, Lockheed Aircraft Corporation Electra 10-A, Lockheed Aircraft Corporation
Electra 10-B, Lockheed Aircraft Corporation Electra 10-E, Lockheed Aircraft Corporation Electra L-
188, Lockheed Martin Model 382 (L-100) Hercules, Maryland Air Industries Inc. F27, Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries, Ltd YS-11, Short Bros. Limited SD3-30 and Short Bros. Limited SD3-60. (Essay
given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
have a digital flight data recorder installed that:
recorder that meets the standards established by TSO-C124a, or later version.
manufactured after August 18, 2000 should record the parameters listed in paragraphs (a) (88)
to (a) (91) of this section with the ranges, accuracy, resolution and recording intervals specified in
Appendix M of this regulation. Compliance with this paragraph is mandatory as of January 4
of 2015.
121.344a Digital flight data recorders for 10 to 19-seat airplanes for
passengers
an airplane with turbine engines that has a seating configuration of 10 to 19 for passengers,
excluding any seat required for crew members after October 11, 1991, unless you are
equipped with one or more flight data recorder that uses a digital recording method and
data storage and that can be readily accessed on the storage media. Up to 20
August 2001, airplanes registered in Brazil after October 11, 1991 must meet the
requirements of this section or the applicable paragraphs of section 135.152 of RBAC 135. Additionally,
on August 20, 2001, must meet the following requirements:
must be recorded with the ranges, precision and resolutions specified in Appendix B of RBAC 135,
except that:
be recorded; each parameter listed in paragraphs 121,344 (a) (13) and (a) (16) of this regulation
must be recorded; and each parameter listed in paragraphs 121,344 (a) (14) and (a) (17) of this
regulation should be recorded;
of this regulation should be recorded if there is sufficient data storage capacity in the
existing recorder;
regulation can be recorded from a single source;
must be recorded with the ranges, precision and resolutions specified in Appendix M of this
regulation.
the parameters listed in paragraphs 121,344 (a) (19) through 121,344 (a) (22) of this regulation must
be recorded with the ranges, accuracy, resolutions and recording intervals specified in the Appendix
B of RBAC 135;
feasible, but not after the next major maintenance or equivalent after August 18, 1999. It is
considered a major maintenance when the airplane is scheduled to remain out of service
for more than 4 days and inspection of the main structural component is scheduled.
19 seats, excluding any crew member seats, that have been manufactured after 18
August 2000, must meet the following requirements:
must be recorded with the ranges, precision and resolutions specified in Appendix M of this
regulation;
listed in paragraphs 121.344 (a) of this regulation for which sensors are installed and which
are connected to the recording system, they must be recorded with the tracks, accuracy, resolutions
and sampling intervals specified in Appendix M of this regulation on August 20,
2001.
10 to 19 seats, excluding any crew member seats that have been manufactured after 19
August 2002, they must record the parameters listed in paragraphs 121,344 (a) (1) through 121,344
in Appendix M of this regulation.
with the requirements of paragraphs 23.1459 (a), (b), (d) and (e) of RBAC 23. A
correlation between the values ​​recorded by the flight data recorder and the corresponding values
being measured. The correlation must contain a sufficient number of correlation points to
accurately establish the conversion of the recorded values ​​to engineering units or state
discrete over the total operating range of the parameter. A simple correlation can be established
for any group of planes that:
associated with the flight data recording system. Documentation of the
correlation by the certificate holder.
paragraphs 121,344 (g) through 121,344 (k) of this regulation.
Airplanes do not need to comply with this section, but must continue to comply with paragraphs
applicable to section 135.152 of RBAC 135, as appropriate: Beech Aircraft-99 Series, Beech
Aircraft 1300, Beech Aircraft 1900C, Construcciones Aeronáuticas, S.A. (CASA) C-212,
deHavilland DHC-6, Dornier 228, HS-748, Embraer EMB 110, Jetstream 3101, Jetstream 3201,
Fairchild Aircraft SA-226, Fairchild Metro SA-227.
2012 must have a digital flight data recorder installed that also:
paragraphs 25.1459 (a) (3), (a) (7) and (a) (8) of RBAC 25, as applicable; and
using a recorder that meets the standards set out in TSO-C124a, or later revision.
<EOS>
121,345 Radio Equipment
required for the characteristics of the operation being performed. (Wording given by Resolution
nº 526, of 08.06.2019)
121,349, each system must have an independent antenna installation. However, when
used a rigidly supported antenna or other types of identical reliability there is no need
duplication.
must meet the environmental requirements of the following OTP (TSO):
equipment was manufactured before January 1, 1990; or
purposes of this paragraph (c) (2), “installation” does not include:
during maintenance of the appropriate equipment;
removal of this equipment from another aircraft, of the same fleet, for maintenance.
<EOS>
121,347 Radio equipment required for VFR operations on routes where navigation by
contact is authorized
contact is authorized, unless the airplane is equipped with necessary radio equipment,
under normal operating conditions, to fully meet the following:
Class B, Class C, Class D or Class E aircraft designated for an aerodrome for which
intends to fly;
independent systems. One of the equipments provided to comply with this subparagraph can be
also used to comply with paragraphs (a) (1) and (a) (2) of this section.
night contact is authorized, unless the aircraft is equipped with radio equipment
necessary, under normal operating conditions, to fully meet the specified functions
in paragraph (a) of this section and to receive radio navigation signals applicable to the route to be flown,
except that marker beacon or ILS receptors are not required.
<EOS>
121,349 General requirements for navigation and communications equipment
navigation by contact or under IFR conditions unless:
departures and arrivals, and instrument approach procedures, including procedures
missed approach, if a missed approach route is specified in the procedure)
available and suitable for use by the aircraft navigation system required by
this section;
independent and suitable for navigation on the route to be flown within the required degree of accuracy
by the ATC;
of this section is authorized in the Operational Specifications of the certificate holder;
VFR on routes that cannot be navigated by contact and no one can operate an airplane in
IFR conditions, unless equipped with:
fully to the conditions specified in paragraph 121.347 (a) under normal operating conditions;
and
bilateral communication skills.
routes that cannot be navigated by contact or under IFR conditions. Notwithstanding the requirement of
paragraph (a) (2) (i) of this section, the airplane may be equipped with a single independent system of
navigation appropriate to the route to be flown within the degree of precision required by the ATC, if:
independent navigation system, in the event of loss of the capacity of the single independent system
navigation allowed by this paragraph at any point along the route, to proceed with
security to a suitable airport and complete an instrument approach; and
appropriate by using the remaining navigation system, and completing an approach and landing
per instrument.
comply with paragraph (a) or (c) of this section, no one may operate an airplane unless it is
equipped with at least one approved DME or suitable RNAV system.
covered by paragraph 121.2 of this regulation. In addition to the requirements of paragraph (b) of this
section, no one can operate an airplane that has a configuration of 10 to 30 passenger seats,
excluding any crew member seats, and a payload capacity of 7500 pounds or less,
under IFR conditions or over large stretches of water unless it is equipped with at least:
radio necessary, under normal operating conditions, to fully meet the functions
specified in 121,347 (a) and to receive, satisfactorily, by any of two systems
independent radio navigation signals coming from all primary ATC stations of
route and approach navigation to be used. However, only one receiver is required
marker beacon providing visual and audible signals and an ILS receiver. The equipment provided for
en route signals can be used to receive approach signals as long as it is capable of
receive both signals.
<EOS>
121,351 Radio equipment for operation over large areas of water and for other
operations
large expanses of water unless the airplane is equipped with the equipment of
radiocommunications required to serve 121,349, an independent system that meets the
121,347 (a) (1) and two long-range navigation systems when VOR or ADF equipment
not usable along a portion of the route.
necessary for search and rescue operations in view of the land to be overflown, no holder
certificate can conduct operations in remote or uninhabited areas without such equipment.
long-range navigation (LRNS) and a single long-range communications system
certified for certain routes and certain geographic areas. The following operational factors are among
the considerations to be made for such approval:
degree of precision required by the ATC;
the route (“Required Navigation Performance” - RNP); and
a point more than 370 km (200 nautical miles) from the nearest mainland.
<EOS>
121,353 Emergency equipment for operation on uninhabited terrain; all
operations
operation under this regulation on any area in which, at the discretion of ANAC and as
set in the operating specifications of the certificate holder, such equipment is necessary
for search and rescue in the event of an accident:
and for the number of occupants of the plane.
<EOS>
121.354 Ground proximity perception and alarm system
turbine unless it is equipped with an approved ground perception and alarm system that
meets the requirements for OTP Class A (TSO) -C151 equipment (equipment equipped with
ground detection function in front of the plane). The airplane must also have a dial
no one can use an airplane with turbine engines in international operations, unless the
aircraft is equipped with an approved ground proximity perception and alarm system that
meets the requirements for OTP Class A (TSO) -C151 equipment (equipment equipped with
ground detection function in front of the plane). The airplane must also have a dial
operations exclusively within Brazil, the above term extends to December 31, 2009.
suitable for:
of the perception and alarm system of proximity to the ground.
<EOS>
121,355 Equipment for operations in which specialized means of navigation are
used
unless such systems have been approved in accordance with Appendix G of this regulation; or
specialized navigation that is authorized for that particular operation.
training programs, maintenance programs, material relevant to the operations manual
and for the list of minimum equipment (MEL) prepared in accordance with the same, but with
approval prior to April 29, 1972, need not be approved as required by that
paragraph.
<EOS>
121,356 Embedded collision prevention system (ACAS)
As of January 1, 2005, any aircraft operated under this regulation must be equipped and
operated according to the following table:
In operations in Brazil, any aircraft must be operated with the following
equipment:
meets TSO C-112, or more current version, and one of the
following approved units;
a newer version.
Enhanced) that was installed on the aircraft before
May 1, 2003. If this TCAS II version 6.04A
maximum takeoff weight above
Enhanced can no longer be repaired to the standards of the
33,000 lb.
TSO C-119a, it must be replaced by a
TACS II that meets TSO-119b (version 7.0), or
later version.
units that meet TSO C-119a (version 6.04
Enhanced), or later.
seat configuration, rear, or
excluding any seats in (2) TCAS I An anti-collision system equivalent to TSO
flight crew, from 10 to 30 C-118, or later version, or
seats.
comply with paragraph (a) (1) of this section.
<EOS>
121.357 Requirements for onboard weather radar
aircraft not included in the certified transport category after December 31, 1964, unless
that approved weather radar equipment has been installed on the aircraft.
when flying this plane in accordance with this regulation, you must comply with the following:
certificate holder who does not use a dispatch system) on an overnight VFR or IFR flight if the
known weather information or forecasts indicate that thunderstorms or other phenomena
potentially dangerous meteorological conditions capable of being detected by weather radar
on board, are expected along the route to be flown, unless the airplane's weather radar
is in satisfactory operating condition;
in accordance with the instructions and procedures approved for such eventuality.
of specific electrical energy for the weather radar.
<EOS>
121.358 Requirements for windshear detection system in low
altitude
jet manufactured after November 30, 1993 unless he has an approved system on board
alarm and flight guidance against wind shears, or an approved detection and avoidance system
of wind shears, or an approved combination of these systems.
of this section, after November 30, 1993, no one can operate an airplane with jet engines
manufactured before December 1, 1993 unless one of the following requirements is met,
as applicable:
wind scissors alarm and flight guidance, or an approved detection and avoidance system
of wind shears, or an approved combination of these systems:
970.
minimum, an approved wind shear alarm system. These planes can also
have on board an approved wind shear detection and avoidance system, or a combination
of these systems.
<EOS>
121,359 Voice recorders in the cockpit
large pressurized plane with four conventional engines, unless a voice recorder
approved aircraft is installed on that aircraft and is operated continuously from the beginning of use
from the checklist (before starting the engines for the purpose of flying) to the end of the list
checks at the end of the flight.
Water; and
adjacent to it, so that it is not possible to separate the two in a forced landing. If the
voice recorder and flight recorder required by 121,343 or 121,344 are installed adjacent
each other, so as not to separate in an accident, an underwater locator is enough to
both.
for passengers from 10 to 19 seats unless it is equipped with an approved voice recorder
what:
25.1457 (a) (1) and (2), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) as applicable; and
engines for the purpose of flying) until the end of the checklist at the end of the flight.
for passengers from 20 to 30 seats unless it is equipped with an approved voice recorder
what:
engines for the purpose of flying) until the end of the checklist at the end of the flight.
previous recordings, as long as the information recorded in the last 30 minutes of operation
be conserved.
a microphone or a mask microphone, flight crew members must use such microphones whenever
that flying below 18,000 feet in altitude. Nobody can operate a large airplane with engines
turbine or a large pressurized aircraft with four conventional engines manufactured after 11
October 1991 or in which a voice recorder in the cabin was installed after that date, the
unless it is equipped to continuously record audio signals received from a labiophone
or mask headset in accordance with paragraph 25.1457 (c) (5) of RBAC 25.
that results in the completion of the flight, the certificate holder must remove the recording and keep it
for at least 60 days, unless you are given a longer period. Information obtained
of recording can be used as an aid in determining the causes of accident occurrences
in connection with aeronautical accident investigations. ANAC does not use data from recordings in
administrative proceedings or for judicial purposes.
manufactured before April 7, 2010 must have a voice recorder in the
installed command that additionally meets the following requirements:
as applicable; (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
recorder that meets TSO-C123a standards or latest revision; and (Wording given by Resolution
nº 334, of 7/1/2014)
of the flight;
25.1457 (a) (3), (a) (4) and (a) (5) of the RBAC 25.
as of April 7, 2010, inclusive, must have a voice recorder in the cockpit installed
that, additionally, meet the following requirements: (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
recorder that meets TSO-C123a standards or latest revision; and
of the flight;
and a flight data recorder by this regulation that have installed a
communication by date link after April 7, 2012 must record all messages by date link
as required by the certification regulations applicable to the aircraft. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,360 [Reserved]
SUBPART L
MAINTENANCE, PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE, MODIFICATIONS AND REPAIRS
<EOS>
121,361 Applicability
maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs applicable to all holders of
certificate.
allow deviations from the provisions of this subpart that would prevent the return to service of components
of cells, engines, equipment and spare parts for having been such items submitted to the
maintenance, modification or inspection abroad and, consequently, by unqualified persons
by ANAC for such services. Each certificate holder using items in these conditions must
ensure that all work on them has been carried out in accordance with the rules in your manual
or, at least, according to the manufacturer's standards for the item.
<EOS>
121,362 Facilities and resources for maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and
repairs
and repairs owned and / or contracted by the certificate holder cannot be less than the set of
facilities and resources for maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs required
RBAC 145 to certify an approved aeronautical workshop to perform maintenance,
preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs on the same types of equipment operated by the
certificate holder. The scope of this section includes the certificate holder's inspection system,
where applicable, which cannot be less than that required by RBAC 145.
<EOS>
121,363 Responsibility for airworthiness
parts thereof; and
including cells, engines, propellers, normal and emergency equipment and parts thereof, in accordance
accordance with its manual and with the RBAC standards.
preventive maintenance, modifications or repairs. However, this does not release the holder of
responsibility certificate specified in paragraph (a) of this section.
<EOS>
121,365 Organization of maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs
mandatory), preventive maintenance, modifications or repairs and each person hired by him to
to perform any services, it must have an organization appropriate to the tasks to be performed.
with 121,369 (b) (2) or (3) (in this subpart designated as mandatory inspection), and each person by
the company hired to perform such services must have an organization adequate to the tasks to be
performed.
maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs in order to separate the services from
mandatory inspections of other services. This separation must be made below the level of control
administrative authority in which the overall responsibility for mandatory inspection functions and other
maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs functions are performed.
<EOS>
121,367 Maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs programs
Each certificate holder must establish an inspection program and a program covering
maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs that ensure that:
people are carried out in accordance with the stipulated in its manual;
services; and
according to this regulation.
<EOS>
121.369 Manual requirements
your organization, as required by section 121.365 of RBAC 121, and a list of other people
with which it has a contract for the performance of any mandatory inspection or maintenance,
preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs, including a general description of these jobs.
121,367 of RBAC 121, which must be submitted for approval by ANAC separately, and which
must be complied with when carrying out maintenance, preventive maintenance,
modifications and repairs to all aircraft of the certificate holder, including cells, engines,
propellers, normal and emergency equipment and parts thereof, and must include at least the
Following:
mandatory), preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs;
including at least those that could result in failure, malfunction and defects
degrading the safety of the airplane's operation if they are not properly executed or if they are
unsuitable parts or materials are used;
person authorized to carry out each mandatory inspection;
found in previous mandatory inspections;
acceptance or rejection of inspected items and the periodic inspection and calibration of inspection tools.
precision, measurement devices and test equipment;
mandatory inspection required for this work;
mandatory inspection, is disregarded by a person who is not of the supervisory level of the
inspection team involved or the level of administrative control that has overall responsibility
inspection activities (or inspection and maintenance activities according to the holder organization)
certificate);
maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs, interrupted due to the exchange of
work shift team or for any other reason, are properly completed before the
plane be released for return to flight;
considering the use of the aircraft in advance;
aircraft continued;
of the aircraft, components and powerplant;
aircraft; and
human factors.
conservation and retrieval of information about services performed on their airplanes in a
acceptable to ANAC and which has:
service contract regime; and
<EOS>
121,370 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,371 Personnel for mandatory inspections
person is properly qualified and appropriately trained, qualified and authorized to do so.
this person when performing the inspection, is under the supervision and control of an inspection team
mandatory.
of the work to be inspected.
for carrying out mandatory inspections, keep an updated list of qualified persons who
have been trained, qualified and authorized to carry out such inspections. Each person must be
identified by name, occupational title, certificate or registration number issued by ANAC and by
inspections that you are authorized to do. The certificate holder (or the persons contracted by it
to perform mandatory inspections) must provide written instructions to each of these persons,
describing the extent of its authority and responsibility and its limitations on inspections. That
The list should be made available to the INSPAC.
<EOS>
121,373 Continuous monitoring and analysis
continued analysis of the execution and effectiveness of its inspection and maintenance programs,
preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs, aiming to correct discrepancies or deficiencies of these
Software. Such a system must accompany the execution of all work in progress, whether
performed by the certificate holder itself, to be performed under an external contract.
section the specified procedures and standards do not meet the requirements of this regulation, the
certificate holder involved must, after receiving written notification from ANAC, make the
certain modifications.
determined within 30 days of receiving written notice. Except in emergency cases that
require immediate action in the interests of air transport security, the request for reconsideration
suspends the period for complying with the amendment until ANAC's final decision on the matter.
<EOS>
121,374 Continued airworthiness program for ETOPS operations with airplanes with
two engines.
To conduct an ETOPS flight using a two-engine plane, each certificate holder
must develop and comply with the continued airworthiness maintenance program
aircraft / engine combination used in ETOPS operations. The certificate holder must
develop your PMAC ETOPS by supplementing the manufacturer's maintenance program or the
PMAC approved for the certificate holder. PMAC ETOPS should include the following
elements:
ETOPS maintenance for use by each person involved in ETOPS operations.
certificate holder documents.
Regulation, the certificate holder should develop a pre-flight check adapted to
your operations.
immediately before each ETOPS flight.
consumption of engine and APU oil.
meet and make sure of what is foreseen in this section using a checklist of specific ETOPS tasks.
Before an ETOPS flight starts, a person designated by the pre-flight service check
fulfilled.
satisfactorily the ETOPS Training Program and is designated by the certificate holder;
governed by RBAC 145; and
maintenance ETOPS and complete the PDSC ETOPS, and the organization must be:
and a complete PDSC ETOPS and that can be:
concurrent scheduled or unscheduled maintenance on ETOPS Significant Systems equal
or similar, listed in the ETOPS maintenance document, which incorrect maintenance may result
failure of a Significant ETOPS System.
perform the maintenance provided that:
many different; or
under the direct supervision of a second qualified person; and
perform a ground verification test and any in-flight verification test required by the
program developed in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.
for resolving discrepancies that guarantee the effectiveness of maintenance actions in the Systems
Significant ETOPS. The verification program should identify potential problems and verify
satisfactory corrective actions. The verification program should include procedures and a policy
on-ground and in-flight verification. The certificate holder should establish procedures for
clearly indicate who will initiate the verification action and what action is required. The scan action
can be done on an ETOPS flight as long as the verification action is satisfactorily
completed when reaching the ETOPS entry point.
ETOPS. An aeronautical maintenance mechanic who is ETOPS qualified must comply with and
certify that a specific ETOPS task has been completed.
and maintain ETOPS-centric maintenance control procedures.
control program for ETOPS parts and components that ensures the proper identification of the
parts and components used to maintain the configuration of aircraft used in ETOPS.
ETOPS reliability which must be an existing reliability program of the holder of the
certificate or its System of Analysis and Continued Supervision (SASC) added for ETOPS.
This program must be event oriented and include procedures for communicating events
Listed below:
occurrence to ANAC:
with any airplane or engine system;
in-flight fuel;
ETOPS;
flight ETOPS.
of this section and submit its records and the description of the corrective action taken to ANAC. The reports
must include the information required by section 121.703 (e). The corrective action must be acceptable
by ANAC.
as part of an airplane / engine combination exceeds the following values, the certificate holder must
conduct a detailed analysis of your operations to identify any effect of common causes and
systematic errors. The IFSD rate must be computed using all such engines across
certificate holder's fleet of ETOPS approved aircraft.
up to and including 120 minutes;
in addition to 120 to 207 minutes in the North Pacific operating area and up to 180 minutes in the other
areas;
in addition to 207 minutes in the North Pacific operating area and 180 minutes in other areas.
certificate must submit an investigation report and any necessary corrective action to ANAC.
engine to detect deterioration and allow corrective action before the safety of operations is
affected.
data, the method of data analysis and the process for taking corrective actions.
such that a prolonged bypass operation with an inoperative engine can be conducted at levels
power ratings and in all expected conditions without exceeding the approved engine limits.
Approved limits are included for items such as rotor speed and exhaust temperatures
of the gases.
engine oil consumption monitoring to ensure that there is enough oil for completion
each ETOPS flight. Oil consumption from the APU should be included if the APU is required for the
ETOPS operation. The operator's oil consumption limit may not exceed the recommendation of the
manufacturers. Monitoring should be continuous and include oil added at each point of
takeoff ETOPS. The program should compare the amount of oil added to each
ETOPS takeoff with average consumption rotated to identify sudden increases.
does not require this APU to function during the ETOPS phase of the flight, the certificate holder must
develop and maintain a reliability program accepted by ANAC for startup and operation
of the APU in flight, under “cold soak” conditions.
should develop a maintenance training program that provides adequate training
to support ETOPS operations. The program must include specific ETOPS training for
everyone involved in ETOPS maintenance focused on the special nature of these operations.
This training should be added to the operator's maintenance training program used
to qualify people to work on specific planes and engines.
aircraft / engine has a CMP document, the certificate holder must use a system that guarantees
accordance with the applicable document approved by ANAC.
maintenance procedures that were used in the ETOPS qualification by the certificate holder must be
submitted to ANAC for analysis. The certificate holder cannot implement a change until
that is notified by ANAC of its approval or acceptance.
<EOS>
121,375 Maintenance and preventive maintenance training program
Each certificate holder, or person performing maintenance or maintenance work
preventive action for the holder, should establish a training program that ensures that each
person (including mandatory inspection personnel) responsible for determining the suitability of
a work carried out is fully informed about procedures, techniques and new
equipment in use and is competent to perform its duties.
<EOS>
121,377 Maintenance and preventive maintenance personnel; working time limitations
Each certificate holder (or person hired by him to perform maintenance services
preventive maintenance) must comply with the working time limits established by the
current labor legislation for each person performing maintenance, modifications and
repairs.
<EOS>
121,378 Personnel qualification requirements
mandatory maintenance carried out by certified maintenance workshops located outside Brazil, each person
that is directly responsible for maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs and
each person carrying out mandatory inspections must have a certificate of qualification or
registration issued by ANAC.
to a position in which she is responsible for the work carried out by a section, a workshop or
a basis for maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs or for other tasks
related to the airworthiness of airplanes. A directly responsible person doesn’t need,
physically observing and directing each performing worker, but must be constantly available
to be consulted and to make decisions on matters that require instructions or decisions from a
hierarchical level higher than that of people performing a job.
<EOS>
121,379 Authority to perform and approve maintenance, preventive maintenance,
modifications and repairs
maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs as set out in your program
airworthiness maintenance and in its maintenance manual. In addition, the
certificate holder may perform such work for another certificate holder, provided that it follows
the standards of the continuing airworthiness program and the maintenance manual of the latter.
propeller and equipment after undergoing maintenance, preventive maintenance, modifications and repairs
carried out in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section. However, in the event of major repairs or major
modifications the work must be carried out according to technical design data approved by the
ANAC.
<EOS>
121,380 Requirements for maintenance records
required by 121,369), the following maintenance records during the periods specified in
paragraph (c) of this section:
airworthiness of the airplane, according to 121,709, were attended;
normal and emergency equipment;
aircraft that require general overhaul based on defined time of use (“hard time”);
since the last inspection foreseen by the inspection program under which the airplane and its components
are maintained;
applicable, including the method of application of the same, and, if an AD involves recurring actions, the
time and date of the next required action;
and equipment.
the following time periods:
equipment, the records specified in paragraph (a) (1) must be kept until the
work is repeated, that is, supplanted by another job, or for 12 months after the job has
been accomplished, whichever is greater;
maintained until the work is repeated or supplanted by another work with objectives and
equivalent details;
permanently, and must accompany the plane in case of sale of the same;
the records that this section requires are kept.
121.380a Transfer of maintenance record
Each certificate holder who sells an airplane registered in Brazil must transfer to the
buyer, at the time of sale, in clear language or in coded form, at the discretion of the
buyer, provided that the encrypted form provides for the conservation and retrieval of
the following aircraft records are acceptable to ANAC:
specified in paragraph (a) of this section. The buyer can allow the seller to maintain the
physical custody of such records, but this does not relieve the buyer of the liability, provided for in
121,380 (c), to make these records available to the INSPAC.
SUBPART M
CREW, DISPATCHING AND MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS
<EOS>
121,381 Applicability
applicable to all certificate holders operating under this regulation.
referred to as “flight crew”; operational flight dispatchers are referenced
as “dispatchers”; flight attendants are referred to as “flight attendants” and mechanics
aeronautical as “mechanical”. The word "crew member" means personnel who work on board the
plane during the flight.
<EOS>
121,383 Personnel in general - service limitations
or mechanic, just as no one can work as a crew member, dispatcher or mechanic,
less than:
appropriate to the case;
technical qualification and physical capacity, when required, all valid and appropriate to the type of
aircraft and the role it performs while engaged in operations under this regulation; and
ANAC the documents listed in paragraph (a) (2) of this section.
restrictions established by paragraphs 61,145 (c) and 61,145 (d) of RBAC 61 to the prerogatives of
pilots in command. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,385 Flight crew composition
aircraft complies with Law No. 7183, of April 5, 1984, which regulates the exercise of the profession
aeronaut, and with Law No. 7565, of December 19, 1986, which provides for the Brazilian Code
Aeronautics; and
minimum flight crew required by the Airplane Flight Manual - AFM for the airplane type and
required by this regulation for the characteristics of the operation being carried out. (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
which a specific license is required, such a requirement cannot be met by the execution of
multiple functions at the same time, by the same person who has the required licenses.
certificate must designate one of them as a pilot-in-command and the other as a second-in-command,
as defined in RBAC 01.
<EOS>
121,387 Flight mechanic
No certificate holder operating under this regulation may operate a certified airplane
by your country of manufacture before January 2, 1964, with maximum takeoff weight approved
over 36,300 kg (80,000 lb.), without a flight crew member who holds a mechanic's license for
flight and the appropriate technical qualification certificate for the airplane. For each certified airplane after 01
January 1964, the requirement for a flight mechanic is determined in accordance with the requirements of
section 25.1523 of RBAC 25.
<EOS>
121,389 Browser and specialized navigation equipment
position cannot be reliably determined for a period equal to or greater than 1 hour, without:
that allow each pilot, seated in his normal workstation, to determine in a
reliable position of the plane.
specialized navigation equipment, or both, when specialized means of navigation
are needed for 1 hour or less. To assess this need, ANAC considers:
both must be listed in the certificate holder's operating specifications.
<EOS>
121,391 Flight attendants
flight on each plane carrying passengers:
maximum seats of more than 09 and less than 51 passengers, one commissioner;
maximum seating capacity of more than 19, but less than 51 passengers, one flight attendant;
101 passengers, two flight attendants;
plus one additional flight attendant for each unit (or part of unit) of 50 passenger seats
above the seating capacity of 100 passengers. (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
paragraphs 121,291 (a) or (b), the holder uses a number greater than that prescribed in paragraph (a)
of this section for the maximum seating capacity of the aircraft used in the demonstration, the
certificate will not be able to take off with this airplane:
flight attendants than used in the emergency evacuation demonstration; and (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
smaller number of stewards than foreseen in paragraph (a) of this section plus the crew
used during the emergency evacuation demonstration. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
as close as practicable to the required floor-level emergency exits and must be
evenly distributed throughout the plane, in order to provide the most efficient withdrawal of
passengers in an eventual emergency evacuation. During the taxi the required flight attendants
for this section must remain in their work stations, with seat belts and safety belts
adjusted shoulders, except when carrying out tasks related to the safety of the airplane and its
occupants.
passenger seats established pursuant to paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section must be listed
in the company's operating specifications.
he must receive specific training for the effective operation of these exits, assessing the situation and
effectively conducting an emergency evacuation.
121,391 (b), in the event that at most one commissioner on duty falls ill and has to be
landed on a stopover, the flight can proceed as long as the number of flight attendants
remainder is proportional to a flight attendant for each group (or fraction) of 50 passengers plus
the additional flight attendants used during the emergency evacuation demonstration
referenced in paragraph (b) of this section, which may imply a reduction in the amount of
passengers on board. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
calendar days. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
responsible for more than one emergency exit at floor level if they are arranged in the
same area or section of the aircraft, limited to a maximum of two emergency exits. (Wording given
by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,393 Requirements for crew members during stops where passengers remain on board
During intermediate stops where passengers remain on board, the certificate holder must
meet the following requirements:
flight attendants who remain on board is less than the number required by that section, the keeper
certificate must meet the following requirements:
to be opened in the event of bad weather, and with a ladder or other means that allows the exit of the
passengers;
12,391 (c), rounded to the nearest whole number in the case of fractions but never less than
a.
qualified in emergency evacuation procedures for the airplane as required by
121,417, provided that such persons are clearly identified by passengers;
intermediary, this commissioner or other qualified person must be positioned in accordance with
operational procedures approved by ANAC for the certificate holder. If more than one
flight attendant or other qualified person remains on board, they must be positioned throughout the
cabin to provide the most effective evacuation assistance in the event of an emergency.
being refueled or while the aircraft's APU ("Auxiliary Power Unit") is in operation,
at least one technical crew member. There must be a means of communication between this crew member and the
person on the ground in charge of refueling. This requirement is applicable even without passengers
board.
<EOS>
121,395 Operational flight dispatcher; regular operations
Each certificate holder conducting regular operations must have, at each center or
dispatch office, a sufficient number of operational flight dispatchers, considered
adequately qualified by ANAC, in order to ensure the preparation, assistance and control
operational for each flight. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,397 Emergencies and emergency evacuation duties
crew category required by this subpart, the functions to be performed in an emergency
or in a situation requiring emergency evacuation. The certificate holder must demonstrate
that such functions are realistic, can be performed in practice and that they meet any emergency
reasonably foreseeable, including the possible incapacitation of any individual crew member or
the inability of some of them to reach the passenger cabin because of the displacement of the
cargo on airplanes carrying a cargo-passenger combination.
required crew member, as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section.
SUBPART N
TRAINING PROGRAMS
<EOS>
121,400 Applicability and terms used
development and maintenance of crew training programs, operational dispatchers
flight attendants and other people in the operations area. It also establishes the requirements for approval and
use of training devices used in conducting these programs.
have not been qualified and have not worked in the same role on another type of aircraft in the same group;
have been qualified and worked in the same role on another type of aircraft in the same group;
qualified and worked as a second-in-command on a particular type of aircraft before them
work as a pilot in command on the same type of plane;
have been qualified and worked on a particular type of aircraft, to work in the same role
in a particular variant of the same type of aircraft, when deemed necessary by the
ANAC;
reduced by ANAC provided that the certificate holder demonstrates that special circumstances
justify such a reduction;
airplane or on special training devices. When training is required to be conducted
specifically by plane, this is explained in the text of this regulation;
that provides training, tests and exams, under contract or other type of arrangement, for holders of
certificate subject to the requirements of this regulation;
and qualified, but who lost the qualification for not having attended, within the periods
required, the periodic training requirements set out in 121,427 or the training requirements
proficiency exam established in 121,441;
certificate and approved by ANAC as an examiner for the other crew and / or dispatchers of the
said certificate holder;
according to this regulation; (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
approved or static aircraft. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,401 Training program. General
comply with the provisions of this subpart, Subpart Z and Appendices E and F of this regulation and that
ensure that each crew member, dispatcher, flight instructor, flight attendant instructor, instructor
operational flight dispatcher, accredited examiner and each person who performs or
directly supervise any function related to compliance with RBAC No. 175 is
adequately trained to perform the tasks assigned to it; (Wording given by Resolution nº
608, of February 11, 2021)
Note: for more information on operational requirements for hazardous articles, see
Subpart Z .; (Included by Resolution No. 608, of 11.02.2021)
appropriately qualified for the training required by this subpart;
type of airplane used, appropriate training material, tests, forms, instructions and
procedures for use in conducting the training and examinations required by this regulation;
simulator, flight attendant instructors, operational flight dispatcher instructors and
accredited examiners to conduct ground and flight training and the required examinations and
the simulator training courses permitted by this regulation; (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
duly approved certificate holder examiners;
and certified examiners of the certificate holder, on the type or types of aircraft they operate;
types of emergency and abnormal situations or procedures caused by the malfunction of the
propulsion system, cell, other aircraft systems due to fire or other
anomalies;
the intended area of ​​operations, human factors including threat and error management, as well as
the transport and recognition of dangerous articles;
responsible and the relationship of these functions with the other crew members, particularly with
respect for abnormal and emergency procedures; and
regulation. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
accredited examiners, all approved by ANAC;
and examiners accredited in the type or types of aircraft they operate; and
to each crew member in the event of an emergency or situation requiring evacuation
of emergency;
floats, rafts, evacuation ramps, emergency exits, portable fire extinguishers,
oxygen equipment, and first aid kits;
knowledge about the effect of lack of oxygen and, in the case of airplanes with a pressurized cabin, on
the physiological effects inherent in decompression;
emergency, to the extent necessary to perform your own obligations as a member of the
crew;
on board and has completed the dangerous goods training required by this regulation;
and (Wording given by Resolution No. 608, of February 11, 2021)
provide services.
proficiency required, one month before or one month after the month on which the license expires
it will be considered that the said training or proficiency exam was carried out in the month of
license expiration.
for any program content from the ground segment, flight segment, flight instruction or exam
of proficiency provided for in this regulation must: (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
flight instructors, and certified examiners of the certificate holder, once performed, with
utilization, training;
crew member or DOV;
certificate must be identified in each registration in the form required by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,402 Training program. Special rules
operate under this regulation or a training center certified under RBAC 142 may
be eligible, under this subpart, to provide flight training, tests and examinations, under contract or
another arrangement, for people subject to the requirements of this subpart. In any case, each holder
certificate remains the primary responsible for the quality of the courses used and for the
training your staff.
RBAC 142 certified training to provide required training, tests and exams
by this regulation, provided that such center:
applicable requirements of RBAC 142;
approved programmatic programs, applicable for use in the training courses required by this
subpart; and
applicable requirements of 121,411 or 121,413, sufficient to provide training, tests and examinations for
subject to the requirements of this subpart.
<EOS>
121,403 Training program: curricula
of training, by type of aircraft, for dispatchers and for each category of crew member required
by the type of airplane. The curriculum must include the ground and flight training required by this subpart.
emergency training, which will be provided;
system and procedural trainers and other training aids that will be used by the
certificate holder;
normal, abnormal and emergency measures that will be performed during each phase of training
and flight exams, indicating those portions of maneuvers, procedures and functions that must be
performed on an airplane during training and flight exams;
according to 121,407, including normal, abnormal and emergency maneuvers, actions and procedures
approved, in addition to particular functions approved to be performed on them;
subpart, if applicable, to reduce scheduled hours of instruction.
<EOS>
121,404 Resource management training for crew and dispatchers (CRM);
Compliance dates
No certificate holder may employ a person as a flight crew member, commissioner or
dispatcher, unless this person has completed the approved initial training of
cabin resource management (CRM), provided by this or another certificate holder
according to this regulation.
<EOS>
121,405 Training program and its revisions; Initial and final approval
previously approved program, each certificate holder must submit to ANAC:
or revised that provides the information necessary for a preliminary assessment of the same; and
initial written approval. Except as otherwise provided by ANAC, the holder of a
certificate can only start conducting the training in accordance with the proposed program
after obtaining initial approval. ANAC will evaluate the effectiveness of the program throughout its
application, notifying the certificate holder, when necessary, of deficiencies to be addressed
corrected. (Wording given by Resolution No. 607, of 11.02.2021)
demonstrated certificate that the training, conducted as initially approved or as
modified in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, ensures that a person who has it
successfully completed is adequately trained to perform the functions for which it has been
designated.
training, including reduction of hours programmed as authorized by this subpart, ANAC
takes into account all instructional aids, devices, methods and procedures listed
certificate holder in the curriculum required by 121,403, who can improve the quality and
the effectiveness of the teaching / learning process. If there is approval to reduce scheduled hours, the
ANAC will provide the certificate holder with a written authorization informing the bases of such
approval.
training program with final approval, a written notice will be issued to the holder
certificate involved, stipulating the modifications to be made. Within 30 days after
receive the notification, the certificate holder may appeal the decision to ANAC requesting
reconsideration of it. The presentation of an appeal suspends the execution of the modifications until
the final decision of ANAC. However, if an emergency situation is considered to exist
requiring immediate action in the interests of air transport security, ANAC may, informing
the reasons, determine an immediate review.
<EOS>
121,406 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,407 Training program; Approval of airplane simulators and other devices
training
training permitted under 121,409 in examinations required by subpart O of this regulation
or as permitted in Appendices E and F of this regulation, you must:
or exam will be conducted;
simulated that results in a change in performance, functions or other required characteristic
for approval;
must be completed by the instructor or examiner at the end of each training section or exam
flight.
for use by more than one certificate holder. At the request of the certificate holder, the
ANAC may authorize the use of a simulator or other training device located in the
abroad, belonging to an airplane manufacturer or an airline, upon recognition
prior approval by ANAC of its approval for specific training by the aeronautical authorities
of the country involved
flight number fixed in 121,439 and 121,441 and in Appendices E and F of this regulation, it must:
H of this regulation; and
121,424 (a) and (c) and Appendix H of this regulation.
operational training to avoid low altitude wind shears and CFIT - Controlled Flight
into Terrain, approved for the certificate holder according to section 121.409 of this regulation, the
run on a flight simulator approved under this section.
<EOS>
121,409 Training course using airplane simulator and other safety devices
training
other training devices, provided they are used as provided in this section.
in section 121.441 of this regulation, if such a course:
as a "briefing" before and a "de-briefing" after each training section;
Appendix F of this regulation; or
emergencies that can be expected in en-route operations;
certificate; and
The successful completion of this training course must be attested by an examiner
accredited or by an INSPAC.
training program for the airplane type include:
or
training, as provided for in 121,425 (c).
flight training courses for pilots an approved flight simulator for each type of flight
aircraft capable of providing, at least, the training of normal, abnormal and
approved emergency services included in its operational training program for wind shears
at low altitude and CFIT - Controlled Flight into Terrain. The operational training program
approved for these abnormal maneuvers must be included in each of the training programs
established under sections 121,409 (b), 121,418, 121,424 and 121,427 of this regulation.
<EOS>
121,411 Qualifications: accredited airplane examiner and accredited examiner in
simulator
conducting flight checks or instruction on an airplane, flight simulator, or flight
flight training device for a particular type of aircraft;
conducting flight checks or instruction, but only in a flight simulator or in a flight control device
flight training for a particular type of aircraft;
the functions described in 121,401 (a) (4).
accredited airplane examiner in a training program established under this
subpart, unless, with respect to the particular type of aircraft involved, that person:
commander, flight mechanic, navigator or flight attendant, as appropriate, in operations
according to this regulation;
including periodic training, required to work as a pilot in command, mechanic of
flight or navigator, as applicable, in operations under this regulation;
that are required to work as a pilot-in-command, flight mechanic or navigator, as
applicable, in operations under this regulation;
including airplane flight training and practice for initial and transition training;
valid class and appropriate to the functions it performs; (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
accredited examiner on a simulator, or on a flight training device, in a program
of training established under this regulation, unless, with respect to the particular airplane
involved, meet the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, or:
required to work as a pilot in command, flight mechanic or navigator, as applicable,
in operations under this regulation; (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
including periodic training, that are required to work as a pilot in command,
flight mechanic or navigator in operations under this regulation;
competence that are required to work as a pilot in command, flight mechanic or
browser in operations under this regulation;
must be noted in the individual training records maintained by the certificate holder.
exercise the functions of examiner but cannot compose the crew required in operations
according to this regulation. In addition, they must comply with the provisions of paragraphs 61.145 (c) and
61,145 (d) of RBAC 61. (Wording provided by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
within the 12-month period preceding the execution of any examination conducted by him in
simulator; or
within the period established by this program, which must precede the execution of any examination
conducted by him in a simulator.
considered to have been completed in the requested month if completed in the previous month
or following the required month. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,412 Qualifications: airplane flight instructor and simulator flight instructor
an airplane, a flight simulator or a flight training device for a particular type
by airplane;
but only on a flight simulator or on a flight training device for a particular
airplane type;
described in 121,401 (a) (4).
airplane flight instructor in a training program established under this subpart, the
unless, with respect to the particular type of aircraft involved, that person:
command, flight mechanic or navigator, as appropriate, in operations under this regulation;
including periodic training, required to work as a pilot in command, mechanic of
flight or navigator, as applicable, in operations under this regulation;
that are required to work as a pilot-in-command, flight mechanic or navigator or
flight attendant, as applicable, in operations under this regulation;
including airplane flight training and practice for initial and transition training;
physical capacity of 1st or 2nd class valid and adequate to the functions that it performs;
flight instructor in a simulator, or in a flight training device, in a flight program
training established under this regulation, unless, with respect to the particular airplane
involved, meet the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section, or:
command, flight mechanic or navigator, as applicable, in operations under this
regulation; (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
including periodic training, that are required to work as a pilot in command,
flight mechanic or navigator in operations under this regulation;
competence that are required to work as a pilot in command, flight mechanic or
browser in operations under this regulation; and
must be noted in the individual training records maintained by the certificate holder.
instructor functions but cannot compose the required crew for operations under this
regulation. In international operations under this regulation, flight instructors on airplanes
who are 60 years of age or older can exercise the functions of instructor but cannot compose
the required crew. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
within the 12-month period preceding the execution of any instruction conducted by him in
simulator (and must have a valid and appropriate CMA); or (Wording given by Resolution No. 526,
of 06.08.2019)
within the period established by this program, which must precede the execution of any
instruction conducted by him in a simulator.
considered to have been completed in the requested month if completed in the previous month
or following the required month. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
121.412a Qualifications of the operational flight dispatcher instructor
conduct instruction of a company's equipment.
approved by ANAC, which has an employment contract in the function (this exercised at least 3 years ago)
Operational Flight Dispatcher.
Operational Flight Dispatcher instructor in a training program established under
this subpart, unless, with respect to the particular type of airplane, that person:
Flight, in operations according to this regulation;
including periodic training, required to work as an Operational Flight Dispatcher,
in operations under this regulation;
required to work as an Operational Flight Dispatcher in operations under this
regulation; and
training program established by the operator.
as an instructor on one or more planes.
for Dispatchers newly hired or in transition to other equipment.
Operational Flight Dispatcher instructor in a training program established under
this subpart, unless, with respect to the particular type of airplane, that person:
Flight, in operations according to this regulation;
including periodic training, required to work as an Operational Flight Dispatcher,
in operations under this regulation;
required to work as an Operational Flight Dispatcher instructor in operations under
this regulation; and
training program established by the operator.
121.412b Qualifications. Flight operational dispatcher: accredited examiner
authorized to conduct competency exams in Flight Operational Dispatchers.
operator and approved by ANAC, which has an employment contract in the function (this exercised at least
Operational Flight Dispatcher 3 years ago) and performs the function of conducting competency exams
Operational Flight Dispatchers.
Operational Flight Dispatcher Accredited Examiner in a training program
established under this subpart, unless, with respect to the particular type of aircraft, that
people:
Flight Operational, in operations according to this regulation;
involved, including periodic training, required to work as a Dispatcher
Flight Operational, in operations according to this regulation;
required to work as an Operational Flight Dispatcher in operations under this
regulation;
training program established by the operator;
in which he intends to be an examiner; and
<EOS>
121,413 Requirements for initial training, transition training and exams:
airplane accredited examiners and simulator accredited examiners
accredited examiner unless:
competence under the observation of an INSPAC or other designated accredited examiner
by the operator. The observed examination can be carried out totally or partially on an airplane, in a
flight simulator or in a flight training device. (Wording given by Resolution nº 334,
of 01.07.2014)
having been completed in the requested month if completed in the month before or after the month
required. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
certificate;
abnormal and emergency conditions required by the type of aircraft involved.
approved procedures and limitations in the performance of normal, abnormal and
required by the type of airplane to which the examiner is transitioning.
airplane, to an accredited airplane mechanic examiner and to an examiner
accredited aircraft navigators must include the following:
during an exam;
performed during an exam;
pilot stations, checking the execution of normal, abnormal and emergency maneuvers
required, in order to ensure competence in the application of flight examinations for required pilots
by this regulation; and
emergency situations that may occur during an exam.
accredited aircraft navigators, training to ensure competence in the performance of
your duties.
flight simulator or flight training device, as appropriate.
should include the following:
normal, abnormal and emergency conditions required, in order to ensure competence in the application of
flight exams required by this regulation. These trainings and practices must be carried out
in a flight simulator or flight training device;
both, to ensure competence in conducting the in-flight examinations required by this
regulation.
<EOS>
121,414 Requirements for initial training, transition training and exams: instructors
flight attendants and simulator flight instructors
flight instructor unless:
flight; and
under the observation of an INSPAC or an accredited operator examiner. The observed examination
can be carried out, in whole or in part, on an airplane, in a flight simulator or on a device
flight training. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
having been completed in the requested month if completed in the month before or after the month
required. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
certificate;
abnormal and emergency conditions required by the type of aircraft involved.
approved procedures and limitations for the performance of normal, abnormal and
emergency rules applicable to the airplane for which the flight instructor is in transition
airplane flight mechanics instructors and airplane navigator instructors should include the
Following:
emergency situations that may occur during instruction;
performed during instruction;
left and right side of normal, abnormal and emergency procedures, in order to ensure
competence as an instructor; and
emergency situations that may occur during instruction.
airplane flight training to ensure competence in the performance of their duties.
flight simulator or flight training device, as appropriate.
the next:
to ensure competence to conduct the flight instruction required by this regulation. This one
training can be carried out in whole or in part, in a flight simulator or in a flight
flight training, as appropriate;
both, to ensure competence in conducting the flight instruction required by this regulation.
<EOS>
121,415 Training requirements. Flight operational dispatchers and crew in general
appropriate for the particular designation of the crew member or dispatcher:
hired, including 40 hours of instruction on the ground, which can be reduced according to
with section 121.405, or as specified in 121.401 (d), on at least the following subjects:
applicable to flight attendants);
requirements of RBAC No. 175; and (Wording given by Resolution No. 608, of February 11, 2021)
Resolution No. 608, of February 11, 2021)
as applicable;
121,424 to 121,426, as applicable.
established by section 121.427.
certificate holder, there is a need for additional training to ensure that each type of
crew and each dispatcher is adequately trained to perform the duties assigned to him
designated, the training program must provide the difference training specified in
121,418.
sections 121.419 and 121.424, for a particular type of aircraft, aiming to qualify as a pilot in
commander or second in command a qualified crew member and working as second in command
command or flight mechanic, respectively, on that same type of airplane.
sections 121.419 to 121.425 for transition or level-up training, as applicable,
can be omitted and the number of hours of ground instruction and plane instruction
can be reduced in accordance with section 121.405.
periodic, each training program must also provide ground and flight training,
instructions and practices as necessary to ensure that each crew member and dispatcher:
each plane, function in the crew and the characteristics of operation in which it works; and (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
changes in the types of aircraft you work on.
<EOS>
121,417 Emergency training for crew
section with respect to each type, model and configuration of aircraft and with respect to each type of
required crew member and each operation conducted, respecting the characteristics of the operation
authorized by the certificate holder. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
emergency, including coordination among crew members on such occasions;
including:
different classes of fire; and
installed (if applicable), with emphasis on training the operation of the exits under adverse conditions.
electrical equipment and respective circuit breakers located in the cockpit and cockpit areas
passengers, including all galleys, service centers, elevators, washbasins and
sound and image;
need help from others to move more quickly to an exit in
case of emergency evacuation;
crew, including familiarization with the set of medical emergencies;
usual; and
survival installed.
related to the emergency situation being trained.
foreseen training, using those items of emergency equipment installed in each type
by plane on which he works (the alternative periodic training provided for in paragraph 121.433 (c)
of this regulation can be done through pictorial presentations or approved demonstrations):
initial. Each crew member must perform:
breathing equipment ”- PBE), in which the crew fights real or simulated fire using at least
least one type of portable fire extinguisher installed, or an approved fire extinguisher, which
be appropriate for the type of real or simulated fire to be fought while using the type of PBE
installed required by 121,337 or an approved PBE simulator device as defined in
paragraph (d) of this section to fight fires on board aircraft;
fire using at least one type of installed portable fire extinguisher, or a fire extinguisher.
approved fire, which is appropriate for the type of fire to be combated. This exercise is not
required if the crew member performs the exercise provided for in paragraph (c) (1) (i) using a PBE and
fighting real fire;
approved training device) using at least one type of
evacuation installed. The crew member can only observe the emergency exits of the airplane being
open in emergency mode and the associated slides / dinghy being deployed and inflated or
he can perform the tasks himself which result in the consummation of such actions.
every 24 months, during periodic training. Each crew member must: (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
actions and forces required to deploy slides for emergency evacuation;
breathing protector;
not limited to:
slides / dinghy.
slide / dinghy installed, if applicable;
each type of slide / boat; and
the PBE exercise and the fire-fighting exercise described in paragraphs (c) (1) (i) were performed
and (c) (1) (ii) of this section as part of the requirements for emergency exercises to be performed
once from paragraphs (c) (1) or (c) (2) of this section, as appropriate. Each crew member who has
performed the PBE and fire fighting exercises described in paragraphs (c) (1) (i) and (c) (1) (ii)
of this section after May 26, 1987, is considered to be in compliance with this regulation by
present information or documentation, in the form and in a manner acceptable to ANAC,
demonstrating that the appropriate exercises were performed.
Following:
using an appropriate type of fire extinguisher, until the fire is extinguished;
been approved by ANAC for use in meeting the training requirements of 121,417 (c);
using established procedures that increase the skill of the person involved in the training;
the proper use of protective breathing equipment while fighting real fire or
simulated;
approved by ANAC for use in meeting the training requirements of 121,417 (c);
sufficient magnitude and duration to meet the training objectives described in paragraphs
various aircraft fire-fighting scenarios such as lavatory fire,
<EOS>
121,418 Differences training; crew and dispatchers
following, as applicable to the duties to responsibilities of each:
initial flight, unless ANAC considers that specific matters are not necessary;
initial airplane flight training, unless ANAC considers certain maneuvers or
unnecessary procedures;
as needed for the type of airplane, the operating characteristics and the crew or dispatcher
involved. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
included as part of the initial, transition, level-up and periodic training for the
said plane.
<EOS>
121,419 Pilots and flight mechanics; initial, transition and elevation ground training
level
Flight must include at least the following, as applicable for each function:
takeoffs and landings;
atmospheric phenomena, including the principles of frontal systems, ice, fog, thunderstorms and
high-altitude atmospheric changes;
instrument approach;
decision (DH) or minimum descent altitude (MDA) approaching by instruments;
appropriate; principles of normal, abnormal and emergency operation; procedures and limitations
applicable;
including low-lying wind shears; and
turbulent (including clear sky turbulence), ice, hail and other weather conditions
potentially dangerous;
following scheduled hours of instruction on the subjects required by paragraph (a) of this section
and paragraph 121.415 (a), unless reduced to 121.405:
flight mechanics can be established on the basis of reduced initial training according to
paragraph 121,405 (d). (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,420 Browsers. initial and transition soil training
matters specified in 121,419 (a), as appropriate to their duties and responsibilities, and
on the following with respect to the particular type of airplane:
radio, radar and other electronic equipment;
scheduled training sessions on the subjects specified in paragraph (a) of this section and in
121,415 (a), unless reduced in accordance with 121,405:
<EOS>
121,421 Flight attendants. Initial and transitional soil training
on at least the following subjects:
disabled passengers and procedures to be followed in the case of disorderly persons or
people whose conduct may impair security; and
importance in cases of ditching, evacuation, in-flight emergencies and other related duties;
including emergency procedures in cases of attempted kidnapping or other situations
abnormal;
conditioning and ventilation of the passenger cabin; and
static.
competence to determine the person's ability to perform his or her duties and
responsibilities. This exam can be conducted by an INSPAC or by an examiner
accredited. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
following scheduled hours of instruction on the subjects listed in paragraph (a) of this section and
121,415 (a), unless reduced in accordance with 121,405
<EOS>
121,422 Operational flight dispatchers. Initial and transitional soil training
at least the following:
airspace, including the characteristics of these systems and the appropriate procedures for
normal and emergency communications;
interpretation of meteorological data (including route forecasts, temperatures and other conditions
meteorological conditions of destination and alternative aerodromes), frontal systems, wind conditions and
the use of weather charts and forecasts for different altitudes;
meteorological;
sending this information to air traffic control agencies; and
navigation equipment, approach instrumentation, communications equipment,
emergency equipment and procedures and other matters of interest to the duties and
dispatchers' responsibilities;
paragraph 121,419 (a) (2) (vi);
fuel; and
including the activation of public agencies, aeronautical infrastructure and the certificate holder
aiming at maximum support to the aircraft in danger.
competence, which can be conducted by an INSPAC or an accredited examiner, with a view to
determine the knowledge and skill of each dispatcher in the performance of duties and
responsibilities specified in paragraph (a) of this section. (Wording given by Resolution nº 334,
of 01.07.2014)
scheduled training sessions on the subjects listed in paragraph (a) of this section and in paragraph
121,415 (a) of this subpart:
<EOS>
121,424 Pilots. Initial, Transition and Elevation Flight Training
in-flight training and practice of the maneuvers and procedures listed in Appendix E of this
approved flight training program for low altitude wind shears
to the certificate holder, as appropriate.
by plane, except:
airplane simulator specifically approved for the execution of such maneuvers and procedures; and
appropriate training device or on a static aircraft, as permitted by Appendix E
this regulation.
paragraph (a) of this section must include at least the following scheduled hours of
airplane training and practice, unless reduced in accordance with section 121.405:
hours; and
training using an airplane simulator in accordance with paragraphs 121.409 (c) and (d) of this
regulation, each pilot must successfully complete the following training:
set out in Appendix E of this regulation for initial flight training and that can be
carried out in an airplane simulator with or without a visualization system; and
in command or second in command, as applicable, performing at least the maneuvers and
procedures listed in Appendix F of this regulation and that can be performed in a simulator
of the plane with or without a visualization system.
least of the maneuvers and procedures for training low wind scissors listed
in the approved program for the certificate holder and that can be performed in a simulator
that has been specifically approved for the execution of such maneuvers and procedures.
<EOS>
121,425 Flight mechanic. Initial and transition flight training
Following:
of the flight mechanic. This training and practice can be carried out both in an airplane and in a simulator
by plane or training device;
during rollover, acceleration, takeoff, ascent, cruise, descent, approach and landing; and
records of fuel consumption, normal, emergency or alternative operation of all
airplane flight systems. These functions can be performed in an airplane simulator, in a
flight training device or on the plane, in flight not conducted under this regulation;
technical and with IFR qualification, or a pilot already qualified as second in command of the type of
plane and reverting to the flight mechanic function, you can complete the entire flight exam in one
approved simulator.
paragraph (a) of this section must include, at least, the same number of scheduled hours of
Flight training and practice required for a second pilot in command under paragraph 121.424
training using an airplane simulator or other training device in accordance with the
121.409 (c), each flight mechanic must successfully complete the simulator or
training device:
required by paragraph (a) of this section; and
duties, procedures and functions required by paragraph (a) of this section.
<EOS>
121,426 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,427 Periodic training
adequately trained and permanently proficient with respect to the type of aircraft
Following:
or dispatcher about the plane and its functions;
initial ground training, as appropriate, including emergency training (not required
for dispatcher);
paragraphs 121,421 (b) and 121,422 (b), respectively;
can be performed during an approved route operational flight training section for
simulator. The periodic CRM training requirement does not apply until the person has completed the
initial applicable CRM training required by 121,419, 121,421 or 121,422.
of the following scheduled hours, unless reduced in accordance with section 121.405:
specified in the low altitude wind shear training program approved for the
certificate holder, and flight training of the maneuvers and procedures in Appendix F of this
regulation or a flight training program approved by ANAC, except as follows:
and
as permitted by paragraph 121.433 (c) of this regulation.
as follows:
and
airplane or other training device. Pre-flight inspection can be performed on the plane or using
an approved training device that realistically reproduces the location and details
of the items to be inspected, also allowing the simulation of abnormal situations. The examination of
flight can be replaced by the successful completion of a simulator training program
approved, oriented for route operation.
competence with respect to the operating procedures and navigation equipment to be
used and familiarity with essential navigation information relevant to the keeper's routes
certificates that require a browser.
<EOS>
121,429 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,430 Training for operation in both pilot stations.
The certificate holder must ensure that:
adequate training; and
SUBPART O
QUALIFICATIONS OF CREW
<EOS>
121,431 Applicability
when otherwise specified in the text. The qualification requirements of this subpart apply
also, for each certificate holder who conducts regular operations according to RBAC 135
with airplanes with configuration for passengers with more than 19 seats. ANAC may authorize
any other certificate holder, who conducts operations under RBAC 135, to meet the
training and qualification requirements for this subpart instead of the requirements for subparts E, G and
H of RBAC 135, except that such certificate holders may choose to meet the requirements of
operational experience contained in 135,344 instead of those contained in 121,434; and (Wording given
by Resolution No. 549, of March 20, 2020)
to the requirements of 121,411 through 121,414, to provide training, tests and examinations under contract or other
type of arrangement for those subject to the requirements of this subpart.
listed in section 121.400 of this regulation, in addition to the following definitions:
cruise, descent and landing;
practices, increases your proficiency in newly acquired knowledge and skills;
regulation.
<EOS>
121,432 General
pilot exercising the function of second in command in an operation that requires 3 or more pilots
must be fully qualified to exercise the function of pilot in command of this operation.
during operations under this regulation, except for the following exams and training required
by this regulation or by the certificate holder himself:
flight;
person being examined is qualified and updated as provided for in paragraph
121,453 (a) of this subpart;
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,433 Training required
can work as a required crew member on an airplane, unless you have completed,
satisfactorily, following an approved instruction program in accordance with subpart N of this
regulation, initial ground and flight training for the particular type of aircraft and for the particular
function being performed on board, except as follows:
aircraft of the same group can perform the same function after the successful completion of the
transition training provided for in section 121,415;
command in a particular type of plane can work as a pilot in command of the same type
by plane after successfully completing the level elevation training for the aforementioned type of
airplane, established by section 121.415;
no one can work as a required crew member on a type of airplane for which the
Approved training for the certificate holder provides for training of differences, unless
has completed, satisfactorily, both in relation to the function on board and in relation to the particular
airplane type variant, initial or transitional, ground and flight training, or
differences established in accordance with section 121.415.
work as a required crew member on an airplane, unless:
precedents, periodic ground and flight training for that aircraft and for the specific function
and has passed the flight exam as applicable; (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
precedents, periodic soil training and has passed a competency exam.
may replace the periodic training established by paragraph (c) (1) (i) of this section. Furthermore,
a simulator training course that provides the training provided for in paragraph
121,409 (b) of this regulation, can replace the alternate periods of periodic training of
required by the type of aircraft, except as provided for in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section.
satisfactorily completed, within the preceding 12 months, periodic flight training or
a proficiency exam. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
as provided for in section 121.441 of this subpart, it cannot replace the training of maneuvers and
procedures established by the training program for low altitude wind shears
approved for the certificate holder, when that program is included in a training course
flight schedule as set out in paragraph 121.409 (d) of this regulation.
<EOS>
121,434 Operating experience, operating cycles and consolidation of knowledge and
skills
crew member required on an airplane type, unless you have completed, on the specific airplane type
and the specific function on board, the operating experience, the operating cycles and the flight time of
en route operation to consolidate the knowledge and skills required by this section,
except as follows:
purpose of meeting the requirements of this section;
they can work as second in command;
en route operation to consolidate knowledge and skills for variations of the same
airplane type.
route, each crew member must comply with the following:
exercised and for the type of airplane. However, to meet the requirements for pilot in command, the
crew member must possess the licenses and qualifications required for pilot in command of the type of
plane;
consolidation of the knowledge and skills required by this section must be acquired after
satisfactory completion of appropriate ground and flight training for the specific type of aircraft and
function to be performed on board;
However, in the case of an airplane not previously used by the certificate holder in operations
According to this regulation, the experience of operating the airplane obtained during evaluation flights
Operational and transportation costs can be counted to meet this requirement.
accredited or an airplane flight instructor; and (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
initial or level training provided for in paragraph 121.424 (d) of this regulation, he
must be observed in the performance of their duties by an INSPAC or accredited examiner
during at least one flight stage that includes a takeoff and a landing. During the time
that a pilot in command in qualification is acquiring the experience required by the
paragraphs (c) (1) (i) and (ii) of this section, the airplane flight instructor who is serving as a pilot
in command, he must occupy one of the pilot positions. However, if the pilot in command in
qualification is in the process of transition, the airplane flight instructor serving as a pilot in
command of the airplane can occupy the observer's seat as long as the pilot in transition has already
carried out at least two takeoffs and two landings and has demonstrated satisfactorily for the
airplane flight instructor who is qualified to perform the duties of pilot in command
of the airplane type. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
supervision of an accredited examiner or an airplane flight instructor; (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
following:
hours for group I airplanes with turboprop engines and 25 hours for group II airplanes. The experience
operating hours for airplanes of both groups must include at least 4 operating cycles (at least
minus 2 cycles as a pilot at the airplane controls);
10 hours for group I airplanes with conventional engines, 12 hours for group I airplanes with conventional engines
turboprop engines, 25 hours for pilots in command of group II airplanes and 15 hours for pilots
second in command of group II airplanes. The operating experience for airplanes from both
groups must include at least 4 cycles of operation (at least 2 cycles as a pilot in the controls
the plane);
the certificate holder includes an airplane simulator training course in accordance with the
121.409 (c), each pilot in command must meet the requirements established by the
paragraph (c) (3) (i) of this section for initial training.
accredited flight attendant or a qualified flight mechanic for at least the following flight hours:
flight attendant under the direct and personal supervision of a steward qualified as an instructor under this
regulation. However, operating experience is not required for a commissioner who has
previously acquired such experience on any other large plane in the same group
carrying passengers, provided that the certificate holder demonstrates that that steward has received
sufficient ground training to ensure competence on the plane where you will work.
Flight attendants gaining operating experience cannot be counted as part of the
crew required for the plane and the operation being performed. Commissioners who have completed
satisfactorily the training time carried out according to a training program
approved and conducted on a training device that reproduces on a full scale (except
length) the passenger cabin of the type of airplane in which they will work will be able to make 50%
hours of route experience required by this paragraph.
exchange a takeoff and an additional landing for an hour of flight, up to a maximum reduction of 50%
flight hours, except for those in initial training for Group II and pilots according to
in transition training in Group II. Despite the reduction in scheduled hours
permitted by 121,405 and 121,409, hours of operating experience for flight crew members are not
are subject to reductions other than those set out in this paragraph and paragraph (e) of this section.
in command must each acquire at least 100 hours of en-route flight time
consolidation of knowledge and skills (including operating experience required by the
paragraph (c) of this section) within 120 days after satisfactory completion of:
obtaining a technical qualification certificate or obtaining a technical qualification certificate
additional for an airline pilot; or
second in command on a particular type of aircraft in operations under this regulation before
approval of this version of it do not need to complete the flight time of operation en route to
consolidation of knowledge and skills;
knowledge and skills while working as a second-in-command in a particular type
aircraft operations under this regulation after August 25, 1995, do not need to repeat the
operating flight time en route before working as a pilot in command of the same type of
plane;
certificate holder before completing the 100 flight hours of operation on the required route, that
pilot cannot work as a pilot on the plane on which he has just been qualified, unless he
satisfactorily complete refresher training as provided for in the training program
approved training for the certificate holder and that training is conducted by an instructor
suitably qualified or by an accredited examiner.
the certificate holder can extend this period up to a maximum of 150 days if:
regulation; and
update conducted by an appropriately qualified instructor or an examiner
accredited as provided for in the approved training program for the certificate holder or
an accredited examiner proves that the pilot has maintained an adequate level of proficiency after
observe it on an en route operation flight.
paragraph (g) of this section through an amendment appropriate to the operational specifications, to the extent
guaranteed by any of the following circumstances:
meets the minimum requirements of paragraph (g) of this section;
type not yet approved for use in its operations;
which he designates pilots who must qualify on planes to be operated from this new base.
N of this regulation, hours of operating experience for flight crew members are not subject to
no reduction other than those provided for in paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section.
<EOS>
121,435 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,437 Qualification of pilots. Required documents
command on an airplane in international operations that require 3 or more pilots), unless that
pilot has an airline pilot's license, a technical qualification certificate appropriate for
this type of airplane, IFR qualification and a valid 1st class CMA. (Wording given by Resolution
nº 526, of 08.06.2019)
in paragraph (a) of this section, neither a pilot may work in such functions unless that
pilot has at least a commercial pilot license, a technical qualification certificate
suitable for this type of airplane, IFR qualification and a valid 1st class CMA. (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,438 Pilot. Dual requirements and operating limitations
command in operations under this regulation in the type of airplane being flown, and the pilot in
command is not an appropriately qualified accredited examiner, the pilot in command
it must carry out all takeoffs and landings in the following situations:
certificate holder; and
1200 meters or less;
adversely the airplane's performance;
exercise its prerogatives.
the pilot-in-command or the second-in-command has at least 75 flight hours in operation in
route as first or second in command. ANAC, at the request of the certificate holder,
may authorize deviations from the requirements of this paragraph (b) through an amendment appropriate to the
operating specifications, in any of the following circumstances:
meets the minimum requirements of paragraph (g) of this section;
not yet approved for use in its operations;
he designates pilots who must qualify on planes to be operated from this new base.
<EOS>
121,439 Qualification of pilot. Recent experience
just as no one can exercise the function of pilot or flight attendant, unless that
people:
and 3 takeoffs on the type of airplane you work on. Landings and takeoffs required by this paragraph
can be performed in an airplane simulator provided with a visualization system and approved
according to 121,407 for landing and takeoff maneuvers. Any pilot who has not completed all 3
takeoffs and 3 landings within any period of 90 consecutive days must reacquire
recent experience as provided for in paragraph (b) of this section; and
minus 10 cycles (landing and takeoff) on the type (s) of airplane in which you work. Any commissioner of
flight that has not completed 10 cycles (landing and takeoff) within any 360-day period
consecutive years must acquire recent experience as provided for in paragraph (b) of this section.
a pilot or flight attendant who does not meet the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section must
recover recent experience as follows:
minus 3 landings and 3 takeoffs on the type of airplane you work on or in an advanced or equipped simulator
of visualization system, if flight attendant, perform 4 cycles (landing and takeoff) on an airplane
what is your work. When using a simulator (in the case of pilots) with visualization,
the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section are met;
of pilots):
aerodrome and the plane; and
an airplane simulator equipped with a visualization system, it must:
regulation, by an INSPAC or an accredited examiner acting as a pilot in command and
occupying one of the pilot positions. Landings must be made at the minimum meteorological conditions for
CAT I operations and must be done within 45 days after the end of the simulator training.
of this section, each required technical crew station must be occupied by one person
properly qualified and the simulator must be operated as if it were in a real flight environment,
without the use of repetition of maneuvers or repositioning characteristic of a simulator.
paragraphs (b) (1) and (c) of this section must certify that the person being observed has demonstrated
proficiency and is qualified to exercise its duties in operations under this regulation.
It may also require any additional maneuvers that it considers necessary to give such
certification.
restoring the recent experience of its crews must be approved by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,440 On-Route Exams
pilot in command of an airplane, unless, within the preceding 12 months, he has been subjected to
en-route examination during which he has satisfactorily performed his duties and
responsibilities as a pilot in command on one of the types of aircraft on which he flies. (Wording given
by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
for the type of airplane; and
certified, either on a national or foreign airway, or on a direct route.
given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
or on an advisory route over which the pilot may fly.
<EOS>
121,441 Proficiency exam
person and no one can work as an airplane pilot in operations under this regulation,
unless you have successfully completed a proficiency exam or one of the courses
simulator training described in paragraph 121.409 (b) of this regulation within 12 months
precedents and the en-route examination, scheduled for 121,440, within no less than the four and no more
than the previous eight months. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
meet the following requirements:
regulation, unless otherwise specified in said Appendix;
on an approved simulator or other training device.
at its discretion, waive the execution of any of the maneuvers or procedures for which there are
special conditions in Appendix F of this regulation, provided that:
procedure;
particular type of airplane and in the particular function on board, or has satisfactorily completed, within
of the preceding 6 months, an approved training program for the particular type of aircraft and
function on board. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
authorize additional training in the course of the exam. In addition to asking the repetition of the maneuver badly
performed, the examiner may require the pilot being examined to repeat any other maneuver
that he deems necessary for determining the proficiency of the examinee. If the pilot being
examiner is unable to demonstrate proficiency to the examiner, he will have his certificate of
technical qualification automatically invalidated until it is approved in a later exam, and cannot be
fly by the certificate holder during that period.
<EOS>
121,443 Qualification of pilot in command. Routes and aerodromes
the information required by paragraph (b) of this section for your pilots in command and the appropriate
operations personnel. The system must also provide acceptable means of demonstrating compliance
with 121,445.
pilot in command, unless the certificate holder provides that person with information
updated concerning matters pertaining to the area of ​​operations, each aerodrome and each area
terminal on which the person will operate. In addition, the certificate holder should ensure that this
person has adequate knowledge of the information listed below and has the ability to use it
correctly:
approach and departure by instruments approved for the aerodromes involved;
operate;
<EOS>
121,445 Qualification of pilots in command. Aerodromes and special areas
obstructions or complex approach or exit procedures) are considered as
special aerodromes, requiring specific qualification for them. You can also determine that
certain areas or routes, or both, require qualification in a specific type of navigation.
employ and no one can work as a pilot in command at an aerodrome considered to be
requiring special qualification, unless, within the preceding 12 months: (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
aerodrome (including landing and takeoff) while working as an airplane pilot; or
training acceptable by ANAC.
takeoff) is being carried out with a roof at the aerodrome at least 1000 feet above the smallest
MEA or MOCA, or the altitude established for initial approach for an IFR procedure
for such an aerodrome and the visibility at that aerodrome is at least 4800 meters.
pilot in command in operations between terminal areas along routes or over areas that require
qualification in a special type of navigation, unless, within the preceding 12 months, you have
demonstrated in an acceptable way by ANAC to be qualified in the required navigation system. That
demonstration can be made: (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of 07/01/2014)
type of navigation; or
examiner, using that type of navigation; or
<EOS>
121,447 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,449 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,451 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,453 Flight mechanic qualification
flight mechanic on an airplane, unless, within the preceding 6 months, that person has
performed at least 50 hours of flight as a mechanic on the airplane type or that person has
been examined by an INSPAC or an accredited examiner and shown to be familiar with
with the essential information for the task and be competent in the execution of operational procedures.
this section.
SUBPART P
QUALIFICATION AND LIMITATIONS OF WORKING TIME. DISPATCHERS
FLIGHT OPERATIONS
<EOS>
121,461 Applicability
This subpart establishes the qualifications and working time limitations for dispatchers
flight operators working for certificate holders conducting regular operations.
<EOS>
121,463 Qualifications of operational flight dispatchers (DOV)
no one can work as an operational flight dispatcher for a particular group of airplanes,
unless that person, in relation to an airplane of that group, has satisfactorily completed the
Following:
Such training has been completed for another type of aircraft in the same group and requires only
transition training;
by the certificate holder or 5 hours of observation of operations, real or in simulator, of the
certificate holder, both in the cockpit or on aircraft that do not have a seat
observer in the cockpit, in a seat as advanced as possible with headphones
or loudspeakers so that they can follow communications from the flight crew. This one
requirement can be reduced to a minimum of 2.5 hours by replacing an hour of flight with an hour
takeoff and landing, and the reduction in hours does not apply to operations carried out in a simulator.
A person may act as a DOV without complying with the requirements of this paragraph (a) (3) for 90 days after
the introduction of a new aircraft in the certificate holder's fleet under this regulation.
no one can work as an operational flight dispatcher for a particular type of aircraft, the
unless that person has successfully completed the differences training in relation to
that plane, if applicable.
no one can work as a dispatcher unless, within the preceding 12 months, that
person has satisfactorily completed the periodic training required by 121,427, has been
passed a competency exam conducted by an INSPAC or an accredited examiner and
the familiarization provided for in paragraph (a) (3) of this section has been satisfactorily carried out.
no one can work as an operational flight dispatcher, dispatching planes in operations
under this regulation, unless the certificate holder has verified that it is
familiar with all essential operating procedures for the operating segment on
which it will exercise dispatch jurisdiction. However, a dispatcher qualified to dispatch
planes over certain segments of operation can dispatch planes over other segments
after coordinating with dispatchers qualified for dispatch along these
segments.
<EOS>
121,465 Limitation of service time for dispatchers; regular operations
flight dispatcher's working hours to start at a time that allows him to
become fully acquainted with the existing and planned atmospheric conditions along the route and
other conditions related to flight safety before dispatching any aircraft. He must
remain in service until each aircraft dispatched by it finishes the flight or until it is replaced
by another qualified dispatcher on the same aircraft on the same or another operator base.
certificate holder, require another attitude:
for a 10-hour consecutive working day;
consecutive hours, the certificate holder must give him a rest period of at least
at least 11 hours at the end of the work period;
certificate at least 24 consecutive hours each week. Each month at least one of these
layoffs must compulsorily coincide with a Sunday. Additionally, it must be
waived for 24 consecutive hours in correspondence to each national holiday.
applicable law.
SUBPART Q
FLIGHT TIME LIMITATIONS FOR CREW
<EOS>
121,470 Applicability
This subpart establishes flight time limitations for crew members of certificate holders
operating under this regulation.
<EOS>
121,471 Flight time limitations and rest requirements
All the activity of crew members operating aircraft according to this regulation is governed by Law no.
7,183, of April 5, 1984, by Law No. 13,475, of August 28, 2017, and by regulation
arising from said laws.
SUBPART R
SUBPART S
SUBPART T
FLIGHT OPERATIONS
<EOS>
121,531 Applicability
This subpart establishes requirements for flight operations applicable to all holders of
certified unless otherwise specified.
<EOS>
121,533 Responsibility for operational control. Regular operations (Wording given by the
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
operating your flights. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
pre-flight planning, delays and dispatch release for a flight in accordance with this
regulation and operational specifications.
the flight cannot be performed or continued with the safety with which it was originally planned
or released.
crew, being responsible for the safety of passengers, crew, cargo and the plane.
crew members and their flight obligations, without limitations, even if they do not have valid certificates that
authorize you to perform the duties of those crew members.
lives and properties.
<EOS>
121,535 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,537 Responsibility for operational control. Non-regular operations (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
of those flights.
development, deviations for alternatives and completion of each flight, in accordance with this
regulation and operating specifications. The chief of operations may delegate the tasks of initiation,
development, deviations for alternatives and completion of each flight but cannot delegate its
responsibility for these tasks.
flight if, in your opinion or in the opinion of the pilot in command, the flight cannot be performed or if
develop within the security level with which it was planned. The head of operations is responsible
for ensuring that each flight is accompanied, at least, on the following items:
intermediaries and possible deviations for alternatives;
intermediaries;
crew members and their flight obligations, without limitations, even if they do not have valid certificates that
authorize you to perform the duties of those crew members.
accordance with this regulation and the operating specifications.
lives and properties.
<EOS>
121,538 Security against acts of unlawful interference
Each certificate holder conducting operations under this regulation must comply with the
safety and protection rules applicable in the form and manner established by the National Program
Civil Aviation Security.
<EOS>
121,539 Operational information
Each certificate holder must inform its relevant operations personnel of any
modification of equipment or operating procedure, including each modification
known in the use of navigation aids, aerodromes, traffic procedures and regulations
airfield, local aerodrome control rules and known flight hazards, including ice and other
potentially dangerous meteorological phenomena, as well as irregularities in
communication or navigation.
<EOS>
121,540 Information on emergency and survival equipment
Each certificate holder must keep permanently available for immediate communication
to a search and rescue coordination center, listings containing information about the
emergency and survival equipment on board each of its aircraft.
Such information should include, as applicable, the number, color, type and capacity of the inflatable boats
and life jackets, details about survival kits, first aid and doctors,
drinking water supply, types and frequencies of emergency locator transmitters
portable (survival ELT) carried and any other information deemed
relevant to search and rescue operations.
<EOS>
121,541 Flight times. Regular operations
When establishing scheduled flight times, each certificate holder who conducts operations
regulars should allocate enough time on the ground to properly service the plane at landings
intermediates, considering prevailing winds en route and the cruising speed of the type of
used plane. The cruising speed considered cannot be greater than that specified in the AFM
of the plane.
<EOS>
121,542 Obligations of flight crew
perform any task during a critical phase of flight, except those tasks required for the
safe operation of the aircraft. Tasks like radio calls to the company requiring supply
for "galleys" or confirming connections for passengers, ads for passengers promoting
the company or indicating points of interest on the ground, or filling in on-board reports
or other flight documents are not required tasks for the safe operation of the aircraft.
perform any activity during a critical phase of the flight that could divert the attention of a
crew member from the performance of their duties, or that may interfere, in any way, with the
proper performance of those obligations. Activities such as eating, talking, making contacts
non-essentials by the intercom or passenger notices system, or to read non-essential publications
related to the safe conduct of the flight are not activities required for the safe operation of the
plane.
involving rollover, takeoff and landing, as well as all operations conducted below the
altitude of 10,000 feet, with the exception of the cruise flight.
<EOS>
121,543 Flight crew at the controls of the plane
in the cockpit you must remain in your service station with seat belts fastened
and adjusted not only during takeoff and landing, but also in the other phases of the flight.
plane;
commander, holding an airline pilot certificate and suitably qualified for the airplane
and the operation;
as such.
<EOS>
121,545 Handling of controls
No pilot in command can allow anyone to manipulate an airplane's controls during flight.
flight and no one can manipulate the controls of an airplane in flight, unless it is:
the certificate holder, performing in-flight operation verification; or
aircraft operator certificate, and qualified on the plane.
<EOS>
121,547 Admission to the cockpit
an aeronautical industry employee who has permission from the pilot in command and their
obligations are such that admission to the cabin is necessary or advantageous for the safety of
operations;
authorized by the certificate holder and by ANAC. Paragraph (a) (2) of this section does not limit the
authority of the pilot in command to remove anyone from the cabin in an emergency situation
in the interest of security.
responsibilities in matters related to flight safety or security and facilitation of flight
air transport and certificate holder employees, whose efficiency can be improved by
familiarity with flight conditions, can be admitted in the cabin. However, the
The certificate must not authorize the admission of its traffic, sales and other personnel.
departments not directly related to flight activities, unless admissible
paragraph (a) (4) of this section.
in the passenger cabin, available to that person. They make an exception:
certified, observing traffic control procedures;
qualified;
aircraft operator certificate holder making specific trips on a route;
related to the conduction or planning of flights or the accompaniment of equipment
or in-flight procedures, as long as your presence in the cockpit is necessary for the
performance of its obligations and which has been authorized, in writing, by the responsible superior,
listed in the certificate holder's manual as having such authority; and
directly related to the in-flight monitoring of equipment or equipment.
operational procedures, provided that their presence in the flight cabin is indispensable for the
fulfillment of its obligations and has written authorization from the responsible supervisor, listed
in the certificate holder's manual as having such authority.
<EOS>
121,548 Civil aviation inspector credential. Admission to the cockpit
Whenever, when conducting an inspection, a Civil Aviation Inspector presents his credential to the
pilot in command of an airplane operated by a certificate holder, he must have free access and
to the cockpit.
<EOS>
121,549 Flight equipment
appropriate aeronautical publications, containing adequate information regarding
navigation, approach and departure procedures and other aeronautical information related to the
route to be flown and the aerodromes to be used.
readily accessible and in good working order.
<EOS>
121,550 Federal police officers. Admission to the cockpit
Whenever a federal police officer or federal security agency agent, duly
authorized by the competent aeronautical authority and charged with protecting persons or cargo
on board an airplane operating under this regulation, present your credentials to the pilot in
command, informing you that your presence in the cockpit is essential to the fulfillment of your
this agent must be admitted and may occupy the observer's seat.
<EOS>
121,551 Restriction or suspension of operation: regular operations
Whenever a certificate holder conducting regular operations becomes aware of
conditions, including aerodrome and runway conditions, that may pose a risk to their
operations, it must restrict or suspend such operations until such conditions are met.
corrected or cease to exist.
<EOS>
121.553 Restriction or suspension of operations: non-regular operations
Whenever a certificate holder conducting non-scheduled operations or a pilot in
command of such operations is aware of conditions, including aerodrome and
runways, which may pose a risk to their operations, the certificate holder or pilot-in-command,
as the case may be, restrict or suspend operations until such conditions are corrected
or cease to exist.
<EOS>
121,555 Compliance with routes and with approved limitations (Wording given by Resolution nº
526, of 06.06.2019)
No pilot can operate an airplane in scheduled air transport:
operating specifications of the certificate holder; or
<EOS>
121,557 Emergencies. Regular operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
he must act as he deems necessary under the circumstances. In such cases, in the interest of security,
it can deviate from established operating procedures, from meteorological minimums
applicable rules and the rules of this regulation as much as necessary.
flight dispatcher and known to him, the dispatcher must inform the pilot of the emergency
in command of the airplane, you must be sure of the decision made by the pilot in command and you must
such a decision. If the dispatcher is unable to communicate with the pilot in command, he must declare the
emergency and do everything possible and necessary under the circumstances.
emergency, the air traffic control bodies involved must be fully informed
flight progress by the certificate holder's ground personnel. The person who declared a
emergency must send a written report to ANAC, through the head of operations of the
certificate, reporting the facts and deviations that occurred. The deadline for sending the report is 10 days,
counted for the flight dispatcher after the emergency declaration and for the pilot in command
after returning your base.
<EOS>
121,559 Emergencies. Non-regular operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
he must act as he deems necessary under the circumstances. In such cases, in the interest of security,
it can deviate from established operating procedures, from meteorological minimums
applicable rules and the rules of this regulation as much as necessary.
by ground operations personnel and known to them, such persons must inform
emergency to the pilot in command of the plane, make sure of the decision made by him and record such
decision. If communication with the pilot-in-command is not possible, the personnel involved must
declare the emergency and do what is possible and necessary under the circumstances.
emergency, the air traffic control bodies involved must be fully informed
flight progress by the certificate holder's ground personnel. The person who declared a
emergency must send a written report to ANAC, through the head of operations of the
certificate, reporting the facts and deviations that occurred. The deadline for sending the report is 10 days,
counted for the flight dispatcher after the emergency declaration and for the pilot in command
after returning your base.
<EOS>
121,561 Report of potentially dangerous atmospheric conditions and irregularities of
communications and navigation facilities
dangerous or irregularities in communications or navigation facilities the disclosure of which
pilot in command deems essential for flight safety, he must pass on such information to
an appropriate ground station as early as possible.
communicate them to the person directly responsible for the operation of the facility (when applicable) and disclose
other aircraft and stations involved.
<EOS>
121,562 Reports on collision with fauna
The certificate holder or pilot in command of aircraft flying in Brazilian airspace
should inform the Aeronautical Accident Investigation Prevention Center - CENIPA if
your aircraft has collided with one or more birds, unless it has already been reported as a
accident or incident. It should also be informed if a group of birds is seen that may
jeopardize air operations close to airport sites. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,563 Aircraft irregularity reports
The pilot-in-command must ensure that all operating irregularities observed
in flight are recorded in the aircraft's maintenance record at the time of the first landing. Before
each flight the pilot in command must check the situation of each irregularity launched in the
check-in at the end of the previous flight.
<EOS>
121.565 Stopping the engine. Report after landing
is cut in flight to prevent further damage, the pilot in command must land at the Aerodrome
Nearest suitable (in terms of flight time) in which a safe landing can be performed.
command may proceed to an aerodrome of its choice if, after making the considerations
below, it is considered that landing at such an aerodrome is as safe as landing at the aerodrome
Nearest suitable;
to flight;
soil as early as practicable and must keep such station fully informed of the progress of the
flight.
Closest fit, as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, he must, as soon as he returns
base, make a written report to the certificate holder's operations body, informing
the reasons that led him to choose the aerodrome used. The certificate holder must send a copy
of this report to ANAC no later than 10 days after the return of the pilot in command to his base.
<EOS>
121,567 Instrument approach and meteorological minimums for IFR landing
No one can perform an instrument approach and land on an aerodrome unless
meteorological minimums for IFR landing and approach procedures are obeyed
by instruments approved for approach aid, the airplane and aerodrome involved.
<EOS>
121,569 Interchange of airplanes. Regular operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
conducting regular operations must demonstrate that: (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
safe operating practices;
planes and equipment involved and are familiar with the communications and
dispatch to be used;
equipment and are familiar with the maintenance procedures to be used;
certificate holder to which the airplane will be passed with respect to the arrangement of the
panel instruments and the arrangement and movements of safety-critical controls, unless
that ANAC verifies that the certificate holder who has adequate training programs
to ensure that any potentially dangerous dissimilarity can be overcome, with
safety in view of the training of the crews.
pertinent provisions and procedures for operation with aircraft interchanges, if applicable. (Essay
given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,570 Airplane evacuation capacity
passengers, unless each operating emergency evacuation aid
automatic, installed in accordance with 121.310 (a) of this regulation, is ready to be used.
on board before the airplane moves on the surface, at least one floor-level exit must
be available for the departure of passengers by normal or emergency means.
<EOS>
121,571 Instructions to passengers before take-off
ensure that all passengers receive verbal instructions from an appropriate crew member
listed below:
that it is forbidden to prevent or attempt to prevent the operation of smoke detectors
installed in the washbasins and that it is forbidden to smoke in the washbasins and anywhere in the
passengers;
passenger must be instructed on when, where and under what conditions the belts must be fastened and
adjusted. In these instructions, it should be emphasized that ANAC regulations require the
compliance with the instructions contained in the signs and illuminated notices affixed to the airplane and all
verbal instructions given by the crew regarding the use of safety belts;
emergence of oxygen;
passengers should be warned that while seated, even with the warning cleared, everyone should
keep seat belts tied and adjusted;
The crew must give individual instructions to each person who may need assistance from another person.
person to move more quickly to an exit in an emergency. In these instructions
the required crew member must:
to reach the exits and on the most appropriate time to start heading for such exits in
emergency case; and
it to avoid pain or discomfort.
instructions in previous stages of the same flight, on the same plane, provided that the crew on duty
have been informed of the most appropriate way to help the person without causing any greater harm.
convenient for each passenger consultation, printed cards complementing the instructions
verbal and containing:
pertinent to the type and model of airplane used on the flight.
provide the verbal instructions required by paragraph (a) of this section.
in other languages. However, on regular international trips, it is mandatory to repeat all
instructions at least in English.
crew, insofar as assistance to passengers is not reduced.
<EOS>
121,573 Passenger instructions: operations on water
operating an airplane over large expanses of water, it must be ensured that all passengers are
verbally instructed by a designated crew member about the location and operation of
life jackets, boats and other means of flotation, including a demonstration of how to dress and
inflate the vests.
the verbal instruction required by paragraph (a) of this section.
take-off, these instructions must be given in full after take-off and before starting
the overflowing of water.
Additionally, they can be repeated in another language. However, on international trips
regular, it is mandatory to repeat all instructions at least in English.
crew, insofar as assistance to passengers is not reduced.
<EOS>
121,574 Portable oxygen and oxygen concentrators for medical use by passengers
equipment to store, generate or supply oxygen if the requirements of paragraphs (a) to (d) of this
section are met. However, a certificate holder may allow a passenger to take
with you and operate a portable oxygen concentrator if the requirements of paragraphs (b) and (e) of this
section are met.
the manufacturer;
approved;
minute;
and
approved certificate holder's maintenance program since new or since last inspection
and cleaning the cylinder.
certified since new or since the last hydrostatic test of the cylinder; and
nominal allowance for the cylinder.
by a doctor and owned by the user. Such a statement must specify the amount of oxygen
maximum required per hour and the maximum required flow rate, depending on the pressure altitude
corresponding to the altitude of the airplane's passenger cabin, under normal operating conditions. This one
paragraph does not apply to the transport of oxygen on an airplane in which the only passengers
transported are people in need of oxygen during the flight, in addition to a relative or
accompanying person for each of these persons and attending physicians on board.
amount of oxygen carried must be equal to the maximum amount needed in each hour,
as established by the doctor, multiplied by the number of hours used to compute the
amount of aircraft fuel required by this regulation.
must be informed when it is intended to be used.
not to restrict access to or use of any required normal or emergency
corridors of the passenger cabin.
allow an open flame to be created within a 3m (10ft) radius of
storage and supply of transported oxygen in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section
or a portable oxygen concentrator transported and operated in accordance with paragraph (e)
this section.
someone to connect (or disconnect) an oxygen supply equipment to an oxygen cylinder
gaseous oxygen.
aid and related equipment required by RBAC.
portable oxygen for personal use on board an aircraft, and a certificate holder may allow
a passenger to carry or operate a portable oxygen concentrator on an aircraft
operated under this regulation during all phases of flight if the portable oxygen concentrator
meet the following requirements:
equivalent recognition procedure by a similar body from a foreign country;
batteries used to power portable electronic devices, which fall as an exception
for passengers or crew and who do not require approval from the certificate holder; and
The label will be kept affixed for the life of the concentrator and will contain a declaration, the
manufacturer of the portable oxygen concentrator, that the concentrator is suitable for transport
on board aircraft and meets the acceptance criteria of paragraph (e) (1) of this section. THE
label provided for in this paragraph may be waived, with the authorization of ANAC, in the cases
that the manufacturer's country does not require its display, provided that the other acceptance criteria have
been checked.
of acceptance of paragraph (e) (1) of this section can be carried and operated by a passenger
on an aircraft if the certificate holder ensures that the following requirements are met:
occupy an exit seat. For the purposes of this paragraph, the definition of a
constant output in section 121.585; and
landing, the concentrator must remain stored under the seat in front of the user passenger or
in another approved location in a way that does not block a corridor or the entrance to a row. If the
concentrator is operated by the passenger user himself, it must be operated only in one
seat so as not to restrict any passenger’s access to, or use of,
any required normal or emergency exits or aisles from the passenger cabin.
<EOS>
121,575 Alcoholic beverages
certificate operating that airplane has served that drink to the person.
of their planes that:
drunk is admitted on board their planes.
board appearing to be drunk, the certificate holder involved must notify the fact to the
ANAC, in writing, within 5 days of its occurrence.
<EOS>
121,576 Retention of heavy items in the cockpit and passenger cabin
Each certificate holder must provide and use means to prevent each item of security equipment
dangerous under the pressure of load factors corresponding to emergency landing conditions
under which the plane was certified.
<EOS>
121,577 Food and drink services during surface movements, landings and
takeoffs
its planes as long as there are food, beverages and related utensils, provided by it, in
any passenger seat.
planes unless each tray and table used to feed passengers is
safe at your guard location.
surface, take off or land, unless each passenger service car is insured in
your place of custody.
surface, take off or land, unless any projection screen that extends over a
corridor is collected and stored.
<EOS>
121,578 Ozone concentration in the cabin
atmospheric pressure;
intermediaries.
operate an airplane above the following levels, unless it has successfully demonstrated that the
ozone concentration inside the cabin does not exceed:
sea ​​level, at any time above that flight level; and
duration and that includes flight above that level, an average of 0.1 parts per million, in volume,
equivalent to sea level (for that purpose, the amount of ozone below FL 180 is
considered as zero)
operational procedures and performance limitations of the aircraft or the operation of the aircraft
certificate. The analyzes or tests must demonstrate one of the following situations:
where the plane will operate, the ozone concentration in the cabin, with a statistical certainty of at least
minus 84%, will not exceed the limits set in paragraph (b) of this section;
keep the ozone concentration in the cabin at or below the limits established in the
paragraph (b) of this section.
this section by amending its operating specifications, if:
unreasonable economic conditions, it will not be possible to meet the requirement for a specified period of
time; and
early as practicable.
an airplane when the only persons carried are flight crew and persons listed in
121,583.
<EOS>
121,579 Minimum altitudes for autopilot use
can use an autopilot en route, including ascents and descents, at an altitude above the
terrain that is less than twice the maximum altitude loss specified in the Flight Manual
Airplane (AFM) for autopilot malfunction in cruise conditions, or less
than 500 feet, whichever is higher.
can use an autopilot at an altitude above the terrain that is less than twice the
maximum loss of altitude specified in the AFM for autopilot malfunction in
approach conditions, or less than 50 feet below the minimum descent altitude or altitude
of decision approved for the procedure, whichever is higher, except:
Basic VMCs (1500 ft roof and 5 Km visibility), no one can pursue an approach
ILS with autopilot coupled below an altitude above the ground that is less than 50
feet plus the maximum altitude loss specified in the AFM for pilot malfunction
automatic in coupling approach conditions; and
can proceed with an ILS approach with an autopilot attached below an altitude above
terrain that is less than the maximum altitude loss specified in the AFM for poor
operation of the autopilot in approach conditions with coupling, or 50 feet, the
whichever is higher.
operating conditions that allow the use of an approved flight control command system, with
automatic capacity, until the touch on the track, provided that:
malfunction in coupling approach conditions; and
the safety standards set out in this section.
that allow the use of an approved autopilot system with automatic capability below
the altitude specified in paragraph (a) of this section during takeoff and the initial phase of the ascent
since:
established in the AFM or at an altitude established by ANAC, whichever is greater; and
through this section.
<EOS>
121,580 Prohibition of interference with crew
No one may attack, threaten, intimidate or disturb a crew member by exercising the duties of
crew on board an aircraft being operated under this regulation.
<EOS>
121,581 Observer's seat. en route inspections
A seat is available, in the form and manner determined by ANAC, in the control cabin of each
one of its planes, for use by INSPAC to conduct en-route inspection.
required by the crew required in the type certification, the observer seat provided for in
paragraph (a) of this section must be the one located at the front of the cabin, unless otherwise
set by ANAC.
passengers, who do not have an observer seat in the cockpit, the passenger
The certificate must provide a front passenger seat, equipped with a headset or loudspeaker, for
use of INSPAC conducting en-route inspection. Notwithstanding the requirements of 121,587, the door of the
The cockpit can remain open during such inspections.
<EOS>
121,583 Transport of persons who do not meet the requirements for passenger transport
of this regulation
carried on board an airplane without meeting the passenger transport requirements established
by 121,309 (f), 121,310, 121,391, 121,571 and 121,587; the operating requirements set out in
121,157 (c) and 121,291 and the passenger requirements set out in 121,285, 121,313 (f),
121,317, 121,547 and 121,573:
duly authorized by ANAC;
loads;
your job;
or under the authority of the Brazilian government;
a crew member of another primary contractor certificate of military transport, if the flight
is military transport hired and specifically authorized by the military command concerned; and
employee, traveling on service or to a certificate holder base not served by
scheduled air transport of passengers.
in paragraph (a) of this section, unless:
or emergency;
on board and when it is necessary to fasten seat belts; and
Seats must be arranged in such a way that it does not interfere with any crew member in complying with
your obligations on board.
persons covered by paragraph (a) of this section must ensure that all persons have received
verbal instructions, given by a crew member, on:
life jackets, including the method of dressing and inflating said life jackets.
paragraph (a) of this section should include in its manual procedures for the safe transportation of such
people.
have access to the cockpit on a cruise flight.
<EOS>
121,585 Exit seats
requirements of paragraph (d) of this section, which people can occupy an exit seat. To the
purposes of this section:
access to an exit, from the seat next to the exit to the seat next to the corridor closest to the
same.
from which a passenger can directly reach an exit without going through a corridor or bypassing
any obstruction;
responsible for, in a non-discriminatory manner, ensuring that the exit seats are
busy meeting the requirements of this section;
passengers in your fleet and in accordance with the definitions in this paragraph, what are the “seats
exit ”of each of its planes. This designation must be submitted for approval by ANAC
as part of the procedures that must be approved under paragraphs (n) and (p) of this section.
this section if the certificate holder finds that the person is likely to be unable to perform
one or more of the applicable tasks listed in paragraph (d) of this section because:
both legs:
emergency exit / slide operation;
mechanisms;
seat backrests in the front row, objects the size and weight of an exit door
emergence on the wings;
emergence on the wings;
applicable tasks listed in paragraph (d) of this section without adult assistance (parents,
relatives or friends);
relating to emergency evacuations provided by the certificate holder in writing or
graphic or, still, the person is not able to understand the oral instructions given by the crew;
listed in paragraph (d) of this section without the aid of visual aids greater than contact lenses.
contact or glasses;
shouted by flight attendants without the aid of hearing aids greater than a hearing aid
ordinary;
passengers; or
to perform one or more of the applicable tasks listed in paragraph (d) of this section; or
applicable laws listed in paragraph (d) of this section.
authorized by the certificate holder, implementing the seat occupation restrictions in
compliance with that section.
exit seat affected by this section, in the primary language in which oral instructions are given
passengers, the information that, in the event of an emergency in which there is no crew member
available to assist, a passenger occupying any exit seat may be called upon to
perform one of the following tasks:
are exposed;
the exit;
other people using it to escape;
exit seat:
selection set out in paragraph (b) of this section and a request for a passenger to
identify it so that it can be changed places if it:
listed in paragraph (d) of this section;
certified therein, there must be a request for each passenger, who is unable to
read, speak or understand the language (or graphic form) in which the certificate holder provides the
instructions (oral and written) required by this section and those related to emergency evacuations,
identify yourself to a commissioner to change seats, if applicable.
established procedures to determine whether or not a person can sit in a passenger seat.
exit.
a crew member has verified that there is no exit seat occupied by a person
crew member believes he is unable to perform one of the applicable tasks listed in paragraph (d) of this
section.
passenger information cards required by paragraphs (d) and (e),
selection set out in paragraph (b) and the tasks to be performed set out in paragraph (d)
this section.
for a passenger to identify himself, allowing his repositioning, if he:
in paragraph (d) of this section;
he wants to switch places. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
to occupy an exit seat is probably unable to perform the tasks listed in the paragraph
certificate must, as soon as possible, reposition such person to another seat.
reposition a passenger by occupying an exit seat, the certificate holder must move
for that last seat a person who can and accepts to carry out the evacuation tasks that may
become necessary.
person authorized by the certificate holder, regarding compliance with restrictions on occupation
of exit seats established by this section; or
information for passengers, for the crew responsible for verifying the correct occupation
exit seats, oral information to passengers, seat designation and
for refusing transportation to a passenger, all in accordance with this section;
including functional identification of the person in charge, at the aerodrome, of receiving complaints and
their solution.
of them, in a manner consistent with the criteria listed in paragraph (b) and the tasks listed in the
paragraph (d) of this section to the maximum practicable extent.
approved by it. The approval will be based, fundamentally, on the security aspects of the
procedures proposed by the certificate holder.
<EOS>
121,586 Authority to refuse passengers
under the claim that the person, for needing assistance from another person to move more quickly
for an exit in the event of an emergency, could impair flight safety unless:
transporting people who need assistance from others to move more quickly to a
exit in case of emergency; and
of certificate.
certificate.
established to comply with paragraph (a) of this section.
established for compliance with paragraph (a) (1) of this section, in order to meet the interest
public interest or security interest, the certificate holder will be notified in writing of the change
required, and must implement it within the established deadline. Up to 30 days after receiving the notification, the
certificate holder may request reconsideration of ANAC's decision and the submission of this
The application leaves the entry into force of the amendment on hold until the final decision on
the subject. However, if it is judged that there is an emergency that requires immediate action in the
In the interest of air transport security, ANAC can effectively determine a change
immediately, justifying such a decision.
<EOS>
121.587 Closing and locking the cockpit door
has a lockable cockpit door as set out in 121.313 and is
carrying passengers must ensure that the door separating the cockpit from the cockpit
of passengers is closed and locked during the entire time the aircraft is being operated.
entry and exit of authorized persons in accordance with 121.547, provided that the certificate holder complies
the procedures approved by ANAC with respect to opening, closing and locking
from the cockpit door.
<EOS>
121,589 hand luggage
unless each passenger's baggage has been checked to control weight and quantity
to be carried on board, in accordance with an approved carry-on baggage program
established in its operative specification. In addition, no passenger may board a
plane if your carry-on luggage exceeds the amount of baggage set out in the check-in program.
transport of hand luggage of the certificate holder's operational specification.
closed, in preparation for the taxi or "push-back", unless a crew member has
verified that each item of luggage is stored in accordance with this section and the paragraphs
121,285 (c) and (d) of this regulation.
baggage item is placed:
maximum weight and having appropriate means to hold all luggage or cargo placed in it
and positioned so as not to hinder the possible use of an emergency exit; or
passengers' heads, unless such shelves are provided with mooring devices or
approved ports.
requirements of paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) and (g) of this section.
to prevent the luggage placed under it from sliding forward. In addition, each
aisle must have the means to prevent the luggage placed under it from sliding sideways to
the corridor when subjected to impact forces large enough to induce the final loads
of inertia specified for the emergency landing conditions under which the airplane type
has been certified.
conducted by blind people can be placed:
do not invade the corridor and if you are fully supported on the floor; or
cane is fully supported on the floor.
<EOS>
121,590 Use of aerodrome
operating under this regulation and no pilot employed by him in conducting such an operation
can operate on a Brazilian aerodrome, including an alternative aerodrome, without this aerodrome
registered by ANAC.
121.590a Transport of weapons on board
aircraft being operated by a certificate holder, carry or bring a weapon close to it
dangerous or deadly, whether hidden or not.
Civil (PNAVSEC), a document classified as “Reserved” distributed to holders of
certificate.
ostensible procedures for complying with and ensuring that the provisions of the aforementioned
document.
SUBPART U
RULES FOR DISPATCH AND FLIGHT RELEASE
<EOS>
121,591 Applicability
This subpart establishes operational flight dispatch rules for regular operations and
Flight clearance for non-scheduled operations.
<EOS>
121,593 Flight dispatch authority (Wording provided by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
such a flight.
without a new dispatch, unless:
meteorological conditions used in the original dispatch; and
<EOS>
121,595 [Reserved].
<EOS>
121,597 Flight clearance authority (Wording provided by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
specific person designated by the certificate holder to exercise operational control
of the flight.
certificate holder to perform the operational control of the flight has performed the release of the
same, defining the conditions under which the flight will be carried out. For the release of a flight it is
necessary that the pilot-in-command and the person assigned to his operational control agree
that the flight can be conducted safely.
it remained on the ground for more than 6 hours, without a new release.
<EOS>
121,599 Knowledge of atmospheric conditions
have full knowledge of the meteorological conditions known and foreseen on the route to be used.
have full knowledge of the meteorological conditions known and foreseen on the route to be used.
<EOS>
121,601 Dispatcher information for the pilot in command. Regular operations (Newsroom
given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
available, including information on irregularities at aerodromes and on facilities
navigation or communications that may affect flight safety.
known meteorological conditions, as well as forecasts of atmospheric phenomena that may affect the
operational safety such as clear sky turbulence, storms and wind shears in
low altitude ("windshear") for each route to be flown and for each aerodrome to be used.
additional weather information available and inform you of irregularities in facilities and services
that may affect operational security.
<EOS>
121,603 F Facilities and services. Non-regular operations (Wording provided by Resolution no.
526, of 06.06.2019)
aerodrome conditions and irregularities in communications and communication facilities
navigation that may affect operational security.
about atmospheric conditions and irregularities in facilities and services that may interfere with the
operational safety.
<EOS>
121,605 Aircraft equipment
No one can dispatch or release an airplane unless it is airworthy and equipped as
established by 121,303.
<EOS>
121,607 Communication and navigation facilities. Regular operations (Wording given by the
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
an approved route, unless the communication and navigation facilities required by 121.99
and 121,103 for approval of the route are in satisfactory operating conditions.
certified some of the facilities required by 121.99 and 121.103 are not available in
a route or segment of a route outside the borders of Brazil, a flight on that route can only be
dispatched if the pilot in command and the dispatcher agree that the remaining facilities,
along with other existing and available facilities, they can offer similar flight support.
<EOS>
121,609 Communication and navigation facilities. Non-regular operations (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
Nobody can release an airplane on any route, unless the communication and communication facilities
navigation, required by 121,121, are in satisfactory operating conditions.
<EOS>
121,611 VFR flight dispatch or release
No one can dispatch or release an airplane to perform a visual flight without being in
compliance with the visual flight rules (VFR) established by the Air Force Command, and that
meteorological forecasts will remain at or below the applicable VFR minimums until the
plane arrives at the aerodrome or aerodromes specified in the dispatch or flight clearance.
<EOS>
121,613 Dispatch or release of IFR flight
Except as provided for in 121,615, no one can dispatch or release an airplane for IFR operations,
unless adequate weather information and forecasts indicate that the conditions
weather conditions will be at or below the IFR minimums at the estimated time of arrival of the
aircraft to the aerodrome or aerodromes to which it has been dispatched or released.
<EOS>
121,615 Dispatch or flight release over large stretches of water. All
operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
extensions of water, unless appropriate weather information and forecasts indicate that
atmospheric conditions at any of the aerodromes to which it has been dispatched or released
established for these aerodromes at the estimated time of arrival of the airplane to them.
IFR, unless it demonstrates, in an acceptable manner by ANAC, that the IFR flight is not necessary for
safety. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
each route involving overflights of large water bodies in IFR flight must be included in the
operating specifications of the certificate holder.
<EOS>
121,617 Alternative aerodrome for takeoff
established for IFR landing, no one can dispatch or release a plane from that
aerodrome, unless the dispatch or clearance specifies an alternative aerodrome within the
following distances from the take-off aerodrome:
single-engine cruising, in calm air;
normal cruising speed with 1 engine inoperative, in calm air.
alternative must meet the requirements of 121,613 for the destination aerodrome.
dispatch or release each alternative aerodrome required for the flight.
<EOS>
121,619 Alternative aerodrome to the destination. Regular IFR operations (Wording given by the
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
alternative aerodrome for each dispatch destination aerodrome. When forecasts and
weather information indicates that the atmospheric conditions of the destination and the alternative are
marginal, at least one additional alternative must be included.
alternative must comply with the provisions of section 121.625.
dispatch or release each alternative aerodrome required for the flight.
<EOS>
121,621 Alternative aerodrome to the destination. Regular IFR operations
international (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
IFR flight unless at least one alternative aerodrome is indicated for each aerodrome
of destination of the dispatch.
Brazil, without an alternative aerodrome available, provided that:
hour after the estimated time of arrival at the destination aerodrome, appropriate information or
weather forecasts, or a combination thereof, indicate that at that aerodrome:
published instrument approach to the aerodrome or 2000 feet above the altitude of the
aerodrome, whichever is greater; and
greater than the minimum minimum applicable visibility of approach procedures by
instruments to be used at the aerodrome, whichever is greater.
121,645 (c) (4) (iii); and (Wording given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
of 20.02.2020)
alternative must comply with the provisions of section 121.625.
each alternative aerodrome required for the flight.
<EOS>
121,623 Alternative aerodrome to the destination. Non-regular IFR operations (Wording given
Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
IFR operation must list at least one alternative aerodrome for each destination aerodrome
flight release.
it is possible to meet all the requirements of 121,621 (b), 121,645 and 121,648. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 543, of 20.02.2020)
alternative must comply with the established in the operational specifications of the certificate holder.
each alternative aerodrome required for the flight.
<EOS>
121,624 Alternative ETOPS aerodromes
when dispatching or releasing ETOPS alternative airfields such that they keep the plane
within the longest authorized ETOPS diversion time. In selecting these alternative aerodromes
ETOPS, the certificate holder must consider all aerodromes within the maximum deviation of
ETOPS time allowed for the flight that meets the requirements of this regulation.
flight dispatch or release, unless it is operational (for the shortest and longest time
landing time).
weather conditions will be equal to or above the minimums of the alternative ETOPS aerodrome
determined in the certificate holder's operational specifications.
alternative ETOPS must meet the requirement at 121,631 (c).
of flight unless this aerodrome meets the requirements of 121.97 (b) (1) (ii).
<EOS>
121,625 Meteorological minima for alternative aerodromes
No one can designate an aerodrome as an alternative aerodrome in a dispatch or clearance
flight times, unless appropriate weather information and forecasts give a reasonable margin
for sure that the atmospheric conditions of this aerodrome, at the estimated time of arrival of the plane,
will be at or below the meteorological lows for IFR landing established for the
said aerodrome.
<EOS>
121,627 Continuation of a flight in unsafe conditions
which he has been dispatched or released if, in the opinion of this pilot-in-command or the
flight dispatcher (in the case of regular operation), the flight cannot proceed safely.
However, if the pilot in command finds that there is no longer a safe procedure, the
Flight continuation is an emergency and should be treated as provided for in 121.557 or 121.559,
as applicable. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
particular operation becomes inoperative en route, the pilot-in-command must comply with the procedures
approved for such occurrence, as specified in the certificate holder's manual.
<EOS>
121,628 Inoperative instruments and equipment
that the pilot-in-command can determine whether it is safe to start the flight or continue it from
any intermediate stop, in the event of any instrument, equipment or system failing to
work.
installed, unless the following conditions are met:
technicians take note, before each flight, of the information and instructions contained in the MEL
through publications or other approved means provided by the certificate holder. A HONEY
approved by ANAC constitutes a modification to the airplane type design that does not require
supplemental type certification.
inoperative.
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
instructions that authorize its use.
of airworthiness according to which the aircraft has been certified and which are essential for safe flight
under all operating conditions;
under operating conditions, unless the AD itself provides otherwise;
regulation for such an operation.
Inoperative equipment may be operated under a special flight permit issued in accordance with
sections 21,197 and 21,199 of RBAC 21. (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,629 Operations in icy conditions
an airplane at an aerodrome when, in the opinion of the pilot-in-command or the flight dispatcher (in the
certificate holder for regular operations), conditions of
formation of ice that may adversely affect operational safety. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
control surfaces, propellers, engine (s) air intakes and other critical aircraft surfaces or
when takeoff cannot be made in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
Takeoffs with frost under the wings, in the areas of the fuel tanks, may be authorized.
with an airplane when the weather conditions are such that it is reasonably foreseeable at
adherence of frost, ice or snow to the airplane, unless the certificate holder has a program
approved anti-freeze / thaw on the ground and unless dispatch, release and take-off are
comply with such a program. The approved ground antifreeze / thaw program must include, at least
least the following items:
reasonably foreseeable that frost, ice or snow will stick to the plane and that the procedures
operational of the anti-freeze / defrost program must be activated;
anti-freeze / thaw program;
anti-icing / defrosting;
responsible for activating the anti-icing / defrosting operational procedures in the soil, aiming
safe takeoff from the plane.
for all other persons involved (for example, operational flight dispatchers, mechanics
personnel, contract staff, etc.) with respect to the specific requirements of the approved program
and the duties and responsibilities of each person in accordance with that program, covering,
specifically, the following areas:
inspection and verification responsibilities;
and critical areas, and how this contamination adversely affects performance and characteristics
airplane flight;
use of these tables by your staff. “Performance time” is the estimated time that the
antifreeze / defrost remains to prevent the formation of frost or ice and the accumulation of snow in the
protected plane surfaces. The actuation time starts at the beginning of the final application of the fluid
antifreeze / defrost and ends when the fluid applied to the plane loses its effectiveness. The time of
performance must be supported by data acceptable to ANAC. The certificate holder program
must include procedures for technical crew members, in accordance with current conditions,
increase or decrease the determined performance time. The program must inform that the
takeoff, after exceeding any maximum operating time of the holder table
certificate, is only allowed when at least one of the following conditions exists:
determine which wings, control surfaces and other critical surfaces defined in the program
certificate holder are free from frost, ice or snow;
certificate holder, which wings, control surfaces and other critical surfaces
defined in that program are free from frost, ice or snow;
defrosted, and a new period of activity has been established.
responsibilities for pre-takeoff checks and procedures and responsibilities for
checking for pre-takeoff contamination. A pre-takeoff check is a check of the
wings and other sensitive surfaces of the plane for frost, ice or snow, within the
performance established for that airplane. A pre-takeoff contamination check is an
verification to ensure that wings, control surfaces and other critical surfaces defined in
certificate holder's program are free from frost, ice or snow. This check should be
conducted within the five minutes prior to the start of take-off, and must be carried out on the side of
off the plane unless the approved program provides another solution. (Wording given by Resolution nº
334, of 01.01.2014)
required by paragraph (c) of this section, if it includes in its manual a statement that, in
any weather condition where frost, ice
or snow to an airplane, none of your planes will be able to take off unless it has been verified that the
wings, control surfaces and other critical surfaces are free from frost, ice and snow. Such
The check must take place within the last five minutes prior to the start of takeoff and must
be conducted from outside the plane.
<EOS>
121,631 Dispatch or initial flight release, redispatch and dispatch or order modification
flight release
airplane, as a destination aerodrome for the purposes of dispatch or original flight release.
or released, unless atmospheric conditions at the aerodrome designated as an alternative, in the
dispatch or release of that flight, are foreseen as at or above the IFR minimums
established for him, at the estimated flight arrival time at the same aerodrome. However, the
flight dispatch or release can be modified, en route, to include any aerodrome of
alternative that is within the range of the aircraft, as provided for in 121,645 and 121,646. (Essay
given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
for each alternative ETOPS aerodrome required by 121,624, are equal to or above the
aerodrome requirements as provided for in the operating specifications of the holder of the
certificate;
ETOPS, were checked and the crew warned of any changes that occurred after dispatch.
flight dispatch or authorization, may be authorized, for that specific flight,
amendment to add another aerodrome that meets the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section.
non-regular or a dispatcher of a regular operation must use communications with the company
to update the flight plan, if necessary, due to the reassessment of the capacities of the systems
of the plane. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
specified in an order or flight release unless other aerodromes, authorized
to receive that type of airplane, meet the requirements of 121,593 to 121,661 and additionally the
121,173, at the time of redrawing or amendment to the flight plan.
to do so, you must register such change.
<EOS>
121,633 Timeout system in ETOPS alternative planning
alternative ETOPS in a dispatch or flight release if the time to fly to this aerodrome (in
approved cruising speed with an engine inoperative in standard conditions and with calm air)
exceed the time approved for the most limiting of the ETOPS Significant System (including the time
most limiting of the airplane's fire suppression system for the cargo and luggage compartments
for which it is required by regulation to have fire suppression systems) minus 15
minutes.
in a dispatch or flight release if the time required to fly to this aerodrome:
temperature, exceed the most limiting time of the airplane's fire suppression systems minus 15
minutes for the cargo and luggage compartments for which it is required by the
regulations have fire suppression systems (except as provided for in paragraph (c) of this
section); or
exceed the time of the most limiting ETOPS Significant System of the airplane (other than the time
most limiting of the airplane's fire suppression systems minus 15 minutes for compartments
cargo and baggage for which regulation is required to have air suppression systems
fire).
as provided for in (b) (1) of this section until February 2013.
<EOS>
121,635 Dispatch after, or before, refueling at aerodromes not listed in
IT'S THE. certificate holder.
No one may dispatch an airplane after, or before, a refueling or a non-aerodrome.
listed in the E.O. of the certificate holder, in accordance with the requirements of this regulation applicable
dispatch of regular aerodromes, unless that aerodrome meets the requirements of this
regulations applicable to regular aerodromes.
<EOS>
121,637 Takeoff from unlisted aerodromes or alternative aerodromes. Operations
regular (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
certificate holder, unless:
regular aerodrome; and
aerodrome or, if there are no such minima for that aerodrome, basic minima for operation
VFR established by DECEA;
authorities of the country in which the aerodrome is located.
atmospheric conditions at that aerodrome are equal to or above the meteorological minimums
established for that aerodrome for the type of operation to be performed (VFR or IFR).
<EOS>
121,639 [Reserved] (Wording given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
<EOS>
121,641 [Reserved] (Wording given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
<EOS>
121,643 [Reserved] (Wording given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
<EOS>
121,645 Fuel supply
to complete the planned flight safely and to allow deviations from the operation
planned.
fuel consumption, if available; or
airplane manufacturer; and
predicted; and
provided in MEL or configuration deviation list (CDL).
consumed before takeoff, taking into account local conditions at the aerodrome of
take-off and, if applicable, fuel consumption by the auxiliary energy unit (APU);
required from takeoff, or from the redispatch point in flight, to landing at the destination, taking
taking into account the operational conditions mentioned in 121,645 (b) (2);
compensate for unforeseen factors. This quantity must:
required from the flight redispatch point (based on the consumption rate used to plan
fuel) until landing at the destination.
reduced to 5% if the certificate holder has a monitoring program under the terms
of that provided for in paragraph (b) (1) (i) of this section or if otherwise established by ANAC.
amount required to fly for 5 minutes at a speed of 450 m (1500 ft) over the
elevation of the destination aerodrome in a standard atmosphere condition;
Note - unforeseen factors are those that can have an influence on fuel consumption up to
destination aerodrome, such as variations of a specific aircraft with respect to flight data
expected fuel consumption, variations in relation to expected weather conditions,
prolonged delays and deviations from the planned route or cruise level.
required to allow the airplane to:
fuel, as calculated at 121,645 (c) (4) (i), required to allow the airplane to fly to the
destination alternative aerodrome that requires the greatest amount of alternative fuel; and
fly for 45 minutes plus 15% of the planned flight time for cruise-level flight, including
the final reserve fuel, or two hours, whichever is less; or
for two hours, with normal cruise consumption, over the destination aerodrome, already including the
final reserve fuel;
using the estimated weight for the plane upon arrival at the destination alternative aerodrome,
or to the destination aerodrome when no destination alternative aerodrome is required:
for 45 minutes, under cruising speed and altitude; or
30 minutes waiting speed at 450 m (1500 feet) over the elevation of the aerodrome in good condition
standard atmosphere;
the minimum fuel calculated in accordance with 121,645 (c) (2), (3), (4) and (5) is not sufficient to:
in the event of an engine failure or depressurization, which requires a greater amount of
fuel assuming that the fault occurs at the most critical point on the route, and:
aerodrome in standard atmosphere condition; and
critical fuel scenario ETOPS;
Note - when planning fuel for a failure that occurs at the most critical point on the route
characterized by a landing made with less fuel than the final reserve fuel.
on board at the discretion of the pilot-in-command.
operating the airplane, unless the usable fuel on board meets the requirements of 121,645 (c) (1)
a (6). The certificate holder cannot continue a flight to the destination aerodrome, and the pilot
in command cannot continue to operate an airplane for such an aerodrome, beyond the redispatch point
in flight unless the usable fuel on board meets the requirements of 121,645 (c) (2) to (6).
certificate may submit to ANAC approval a proposal for reductions in the pre-flight calculation of the
fuel provided for in these paragraphs (taxi fuel, fuel for the destination aerodrome,
contingency fuel, alternative destination aerodrome fuel and fuel
additional). The proposal must be based on the results of a specific risk assessment
conducted by the certificate holder who demonstrates, based on assessed operational data
periodically, how an equivalent level of operational security will be maintained and that includes, in the
minimum: (Paragraph in force on May 26, 2020)
of fuel; or (Paragraph in effect on May 26, 2021)
planned during pre-flight planning should give rise to reanalysis and, if applicable, adjustments to
planned operation.
<EOS>
121,646 Fuel supply for the ETOPS critical fuel scenario (Redaction)
given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
and other expected weather conditions, have the fuel required by this regulation and
enough to meet the following requirements:
The airplane must be filled with the largest amount of fuel required below:
rapid decompression at the most critical point on the route, followed by a descent to an altitude
that meets the oxygen supply requirements required by 121,333 of this
regulation;
cruising speed with an inoperative engine) assuming rapid decompression and,
simultaneously, an engine failure, at the most critical point of the route, and then a descent to
a cruising altitude with an inoperative engine; or
cruising speed with an inoperative engine) assuming an engine failure at the most
critical route followed by a descent to cruising altitude with an inoperative engine.
calculation of the fuel required by paragraph (b) (1) (i) of this section, the certificate holder must
increase the predicted values ​​of the wind speed en route by 5% (resulting in an increase in the
contrary wind speed and a decrease in tail wind speed) relying on
potential errors of en route wind forecasts;
ice formation. In the calculation required by paragraph (b) (1) (i) of this section (after the
calculation required by paragraph (b) (1) (ii) of this section), the certificate holder must ensure
that the plane be fueled with one of the largest amounts of fuel below in the event of
deviation from a possible ice formation area:
for 10% of the time that ice formation is expected (including fuel used by
anti-icing systems during this period);
ice formation is predicted.
amount of fuel required by paragraph (b) (1) (i) of this section (after performing the calculation
required by paragraph (b) (1) (ii) of this section), in addition, the airplane must carry 5% of the fuel
specified above, taking into account a cruising deterioration of
fuel, unless the certificate holder has a fuel monitoring program
cruising deterioration of airplane fuel burn performance. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 543, of 20.02.2020)
addition to the fuel required by paragraph (b) (1) of this section, the airplane must be fueled
enough for a 15-minute wait at 1500 feet above the altitude of an alternative aerodrome
ETOPS and after being landed through an instrument procedure;
energy supply, the certificate holder must take this consumption into account during the
appropriate flight conditions.
<EOS>
121,647 [Reserved] (Wording given by Resolution nº 543, of 20.02.2020)
121,648 In-flight fuel management
to ensure that in-flight fuel management and in-flight fuel checks
are carried out.
available on board is not less than the amount required to fly to an aerodrome where a
safe landing can be done with the planned amount of final reserve fuel available
at the time of landing.
circumstances not foreseen in the planning stage could result in a landing at the aerodrome
destination with less fuel than:
Final; or
at 121,465 (c) (4) (iii).
declaring “minimum fuel” (or, in English, “minimum fuel”) when, having an obligation to
land on a specific aerodrome, the pilot calculates that any change in the current authorization
for that aerodrome may result in a landing with less than the amount of fuel
amount of final reserve fuel planned.
amount of usable fuel that, as calculated, would be available when landing on the
nearest aerodrome where a safe landing can be made is less than the amount of
final reserve fuel planned.
as the last geographic point on the route where the plane can either go to the destination aerodrome
as for an alternative route aerodrome available; and
updated information and weather forecasts, traffic conditions and other conditions
operational conditions indicate that a safe landing can be made at the scheduled time of use of the
destination aerodrome.
<EOS>
121,649 Meteorological minima for VFR takeoff and landing. National regular operations
No pilot may take off or land on an aerodrome on a VFR flight, unless conditions are met.
aerodrome's atmospheric atmospheres are at or below the meteorological minimums for
VFR operation set for the aerodrome or, if these minima are not set for the aerodrome
in question, unless visibility on the ground is 5 km (2.7 NM) or more, the ceiling is
equal to or greater than 450m (1500 feet) and is authorized by air traffic control (if there is an agency
ATC at the aerodrome).
<EOS>
121,651 Meteorological minimums for IFR landings and takeoffs. All holders of
certificate
with an airplane under IFR conditions when the weather conditions are below the
IFR take-off conditions specified in:
where there is no published take-off letter.
approach after passing the final approach fix or, when there is no such fix, start the
final approach segment of an instrument approach procedure, unless
the latest meteorological information issued by the Aeronautical Command body or by body
recognized by him confirms visibility equal to or greater than that provided for in the descent procedure
IFR being performed.
IFR in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section and, after that, receive information that the
weather conditions are below the established minimums, he can proceed to
approach to the decision height (DH) or to the minimum descent altitude (MDA). Upon reaching the
DH or MDA, and any time before the missed approach point (MAP), the pilot can
continue the approach and land if:
be performed with a normal descent rate, using normal maneuvers and touching the track inside
the normal touch zone;
approach being carried out;
where the requirements for visual references are specifically set by the Aeronautical Authority,
at least one of the following visual references for the track being used is clearly visible
and identifiable by the pilot:
of the system are clearly visible, the pilot cannot descend below the altitude of 100 feet above
the altitude of the touch zone using only the approach light system.
incorporating a visual control point and has passed that point, unless the point is not
has been identified by the pilot or, due to a delay in the descent, it is no longer possible
land using descent reasons and normal procedures when passing the point.
other than a Category II or Category III procedure, at an aerodrome where visibility
is below the visibility minimums established for the procedure, if the aerodrome has
operative ILS and operative PAR, and both aids are used by the pilot. However,
no pilot may operate an aircraft below the authorized MDA or pursue an approach
below authorized DH, unless:
be performed with a normal descent rate, using normal maneuvers and touching the track inside
the normal touch zone;
approach being carried out;
where the requirements for visual references are specifically set by the Aeronautical Authority,
at least one of the following visual references for the track being used is clearly visible
and identifiable by the pilot:
of the system are clearly visible, the pilot cannot descend below the altitude of 100 feet above
the altitude of the touch zone using only the approach light system:
fixed final approach. If such a fixed does not exist, in a procedure that includes a
procedure or base curve, the final approach segment starts at the point where the
procedure or base curve ends and the aircraft is stabilized on the straight, approaching the
aerodrome, in the final approach course and the distance provided by the procedure.
foreigner must comply with the applicable IFR procedures and the meteorological minimums
established by the authority with jurisdiction over the aerodrome.
<EOS>
121,652 Meteorological minima for IFR landing. Restrictions of pilots in command of
all certificate holders
has less than 100 hours of operation under this regulation in the type of aircraft being operated,
they must be increased by 100 feet and 900m, respectively. This requirement does not apply to landing on
alternative aerodrome.
reduced by no more than 50% by replacing 1 hour of operation under this regulation by
1 extra landing per hour, always on the same type of plane, as long as the pilot in command has
experience in other types of aircraft of similar size, operating in accordance with this regulation.
III, when authorized by ANAC in the operational specifications of the certificate holder, it is not
apply until the pilot-in-command, subject to paragraph (a) of this section, meets the requirements of that
paragraph, in the type of airplane he is operating, without reductions.
<EOS>
121,653 [Reserved].
<EOS>
121,655 Applicability of information on meteorological minimums
When conducting operations according to 121,649 to 121,652, information can be used
general weather conditions of an aerodrome for take-off, approach and instrument landings in
all the runways at this aerodrome. However, if the latest weather information, including
verbal information from the control tower, contains a visibility value specified as
runway visibility or visual runway range (RVR) for a particular runway at that aerodrome, this
value prevails for VFR or IFR operations on that track.
<EOS>
121,657 Flight altitude rules
aircraft below the minimums established in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, except when
necessary for takeoff and landing or when, considering the character of the terrain, the quality and the
quantity of meteorological services and navigation facilities available, ANAC
determine other minimums for routes where security is considered to require other
altitudes. For flights abroad, the minimums established in this section are indicative and must be
used, unless higher minimums are required by the authorities of the country where the aircraft is
operating.
height less than 300m (1000 feet) above the highest obstacle within a range of 8
km (5 mi) on each side of the intended route.
at a height less than 300m (1000 feet) above the highest obstruction in a range of
8km (5 mi.) On each side of the intended route and, in mountainous areas, less than 600m (2000 feet)
above the highest obstacle existing within that range.
rules even if the weather conditions of the route allow visual flight.
<EOS>
121,659 Approach start altitude. All operations (Wording given by Resolution no.
526, of 06.06.2019)
When executing an approach for a radio aid in IFR flight it is not allowed to descend
below the relevant minimum initial approach altitude, as specified by the procedure
of IFR descent for that aid, until the vertical overfly of the aid has been definitively
established.
<EOS>
121,661 Initial approach altitude: International operations (Wording given by
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
In an initial IFR approach, for the blocking of a radio aid no one can descend below
the minimum initial approach altitude (as specified in the approach procedure
for that aid) until the approach authorization is defined.
<EOS>
121,663 Responsibility for flight dispatch. Regular operations
flight, for each flight between specific points, based on information provided by a dispatcher
flight authorized and authorized. The pilot in command and the flight dispatcher must sign the
dispatch only if both agree that the flight can be made safely. The dispatcher of
flight can delegate authority to sign the dispatch of a private flight, but cannot delegate its
responsibility for that order.
those responsible for dispatch must be identified in some way.
<EOS>
121,665 Cargo manifest
cargo to be filled before each takeoff:
assigned to supervise the loading of the aircraft.
operational flight dispatcher and the pilot in command of the airplane, the latter being responsible for signing the
same. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,667 Flight plan
authorize a takeoff and no pilot in command may take off with an airplane unless the
pilot-in-command or an authorized flight dispatcher has completed a flight plan with
all the information required by the competent air traffic agency or, when abroad,
with an equivalent body in the country where you are located. (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
a flight plan containing the information required from the competent air traffic agency or,
when abroad, with the equivalent body of the country where you are. However, if there is no
air traffic agency at the aerodrome and communication with another agency is not possible in
the pilot-in-command must complete a plan, as soon as practicable, after the
take-off. The flight plan must cover the entire flight;
in command must communicate the landing to the air traffic agency that is most accessible to him, via
telephone, telex or other available means or, when possible, give the estimated landing, via radio,
just before it takes place, to an air traffic agency.
SUBPART V
REPORTS AND RECORDS
<EOS>
121,681 Applicability
This subpart establishes requirements for the preparation and preservation of reports and records to be
followed by all certificate holders.
<EOS>
121,683 Flight crew and dispatchers. Records
regular), related to the requirements of this regulation (route exams, proficiency exams,
aircraft qualification, training, medical examination, flight hours, etc.); and (Wording given by
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
health disqualification of any flight crew member (and flight dispatcher, for operations
and keep such records for at least 12 months after the occurrence. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
at its operational headquarters or at its administrative headquarters, as approved by ANAC.
by ANAC.
<EOS>
121,685 Airplane registration
of all airplanes it operates on scheduled flights and must provide a copy of such registration to the
ANAC, updating it with each change that has occurred. Aircraft of other certificate holders, operating
under an equipment exchange contract, they may be included by reference. (Essay
given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
issued in accordance with this regulation must provide ANAC with a list with the registration of these
planes, updating this list whenever necessary.
<EOS>
121,687 Flight dispatch issue: Regular operations (Wording provided by Resolution No. 526,
of 06.08.2019)
alternative;
08.06.2019)
weather information available for destination aerodromes, intermediate aerodromes and aerodromes
alternative. It may also include any additional information that the pilot-in-command or the
dispatcher deems necessary or desirable. The dispatch must be signed by the pilot in
command and by the flight dispatcher, unless it is computerized when identification is sufficient,
somehow, those responsible for it.
<EOS>
121,689 Flight release. Non-regular operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of
08.06.2019)
08.06.2019)
available weather for the destination aerodrome, intermediate aerodromes and aerodromes
alternative. It may also include any additional information that the pilot in command deems
necessary or desirable.
regulation applicable to non-regular operations must meet the dispatch requirements of this
subpart required for regular operations. (Wording given by Resolution nº 526, of 06.08.2019)
<EOS>
121,691 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,693 Cargo manifest. All certificate holders
The cargo manifest for each flight must contain the following information regarding the weight of the airplane,
at the time of takeoff:
passengers.
gradient, altitude, temperature and wind existing at the time of takeoff);
oil that allows compliance with applicable en-route performance limitations;
oil that allows compliance with the maximum structural landing weight on arrival at the aerodrome of
destination (or first landing);
that allows compliance with the landing distance limitations on arrival at the aerodrome of
destination or alternative.
the center of gravity within the approved limits.
certificate holder.
<EOS>
121,695 Provision of the cargo manifest, flight dispatch and flight planning
flight. Regular operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
passengers and cargo);
for at least 3 months.
<EOS>
121,697 Provision of the cargo manifest, flight release and flight planning
flight. Non-regular operations (Wording given by Resolution No. 526, of 06.08.2019)
signed of the following documents:
retain, on that basis, a signed copy of each of the documents listed in paragraph (a) of this
section.
other than the main base of operations for a certificate holder, the pilot in command of the aircraft
arrange, before or immediately after takeoff, that a signed copy of
each of the documents listed in paragraph (a) of this section is sent to the main database of the
certificate holder.
certificate holder and, at that aerodrome, there is a certificate holder agent or a
person authorized by him to take the action required by paragraph (c) of this section, the shipment
of the originals of the documents listed in paragraph (a) of this section can be made up to 30 days after
take-off, with no need to keep copies of them at this aerodrome.
Resolution No. 526, of 08.06.2019)
in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section; and
for a minimum period of 3 months.
<EOS>
121,699 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,701 Aircraft and crew log book (s)
planes, to launch crew information, flight hours, flight irregularities
observed on each flight and record of corrective actions taken or postponement of
correction. At the discretion of the certificate holder, the book can be broken down into two
parts: airplane records and crew records.
flight at least the following information: aircraft registration number, date, crew names and position to be
aboard each of them, take-off and landing location, take-off and landing time,
flight, type of flight (visual, instruments, daytime, nighttime), observations (if any) and name and
signature of the responsible person.
that is observed before, during and after the flight. Before each flight the pilot in command must check
the status of each irregularity recorded on previous flights;
registered in the board book, whether in the cell, engines, propellers, rotors or normal and
emergency, you must register your action in said book, in accordance with the applicable
maintenance of this regulation;
records required by this section for each airplane, in a location with easy access to appropriate personnel, and
must describe such procedures in the manual required by 121.133.
<EOS>
121,703 Service Difficulties Report
malfunction or defect related to:
adjacent to equipment or components;
toxic or harmful in the cabin compartment of the crew or passengers during the flight;
by an external source;
fuel or cause a dangerous leak during the flight;
non-commanded closing of your doors during the flight;
when the plane is moving on the ground;
maximum values ​​acceptable by the manufacturer or ANAC;
during the flight (except the action of turning off an engine);
lighting systems for the emergency evacuation of passengers, or equipment for emergency
evacuation found to be defective or that fail to fulfill its intended function during a
emergency or during training, testing, maintenance, demonstrations or inadvertent openings; and
aircraft leaves the surface of the earth at takeoff until the moment it touches that surface in the
landing.
The certificate must report any other failure, malfunction or defect in an aircraft, which
occurs, that is, detected at any time, if in your opinion, such failure, malfunction or
defect has affected or may affect the safe operation of the aircraft operated by it.
the 24-hour period starting at 9 am local time each day until 9 am local time the following day, for
ANAC. Each occurrence report covering a 24-hour period must be submitted to the
ANAC within 96 hours following the reported period, less hours of non-working days. For
aircraft operating in remote areas, the report can be submitted up to 24 hours after the aircraft
return to your base of operations. Each certificate holder must retain the data they have given
a report, available to ANAC, for a minimum period of 30 days. A copy of such
report must be submitted to the type project holder within the same timeframe
acceptable by ANAC. Each report must contain at least the following:
occurred (eg, pre-flight, take-off, ascent, descent, landing, and inspection);
designation of the type of the major component and time elapsed since the last general overhaul;
project or personnel error;
sockets;
supplementary type), certificate of approved aeronautical product or certificate of organization of
production, you do not need to report a failure, malfunction, or defect under this section if the failure,
malfunction or defect was reported under section 21.3 of RBAC 21.
the required information is available.
report required by this section, he must send them as a supplement to the original report and use
the original unique identification of the occurrence.
<EOS>
121,704 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121,705 Mechanical interruption summary report
Each certificate holder must submit to ANAC, within the first 10 working days of each
month, a summary report for the previous month of each flight interruption, unexpected change
en route aircraft, unplanned landing, deviation from route or unplanned engine removal caused
due to known or suspected mechanical difficulties or malfunctions that do not require
report under sections 121,703 or 121,704 of this regulation.
<EOS>
121,707 Reports of major changes and major repairs
repair of each cell, engine, propeller or component of an airplane operated by it.
approved aircraft, services must receive prior approval from the certifying body, which will be responsible for
monitoring and final approval of the work.
<EOS>
121,709 Airplane release for flight or record in airplane maintenance book
maintenance, preventive maintenance and modifications to it, unless the owner of the
certificate or the company with which he has a contract to perform such services prepare or
make prepare:
certificate holder;
approved;
personally verified that the works were satisfactorily completed;
operation.
can only sign service items that he has performed and for which he has been hired by the
certificate holder.
modifications carried out by a workshop located outside Brazil, the signature of the documents
required by paragraph (a) of this section can be made by a mechanic authorized by the workshop.
copy of it on board the aircraft and keep the original in its main base of operations until the
execution of a new inspection.
paragraph (b) of this section, a certificate holder may establish, in his manual, that the
The signature of a qualified mechanic constitutes the required certificates.
<EOS>
121,711 Recording of communications: regular operations
Each certificate holder who conducts regular operations must record each radio communication
en route between him and his crews and must keep these recordings for at least 30 days.
<EOS>
121,713 Retention of contracts and their amendments. Air operator conducting operations
non-regulars within Brazil
Each air operator conducting non-scheduled operations within Brazil must retain each
written contract under which he provides services as an air operator for at least 1 year after
the date of performance of the contract. In the case of verbal arrangements, he must retain a memorandum
containing the basic elements of the same, as well as any amendment that occurred, by at least
1 year after the date of execution of the arrangement or amendment.
<EOS>
121,714 Fuel and oil consumption record
fuel and oil for each flight.
<EOS>
121,715 Logbook
acceptable by ANAC, with at least, but not limited to the following data:
closure);
334, of 01.01.2014)
RBAC 43;
<EOS>
121,716 Company SGSO records
operational security records that:
operational requirements; and
readability, protection, filing, retrieval, retention time and disposition of records.
SUBPART W
QUALIFICATION OF CREW: INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS
<EOS>
121,721 Applicability
This subpart applies to pilots of certificate holders engaged in transport operations
regular international public air or not.
<EOS>
121,723 Qualifying
No certificate holder may conduct operations, regular or otherwise, to aerodromes outside the
Brazil, unless it demonstrates that the pilots (pilot in command and second in command)
designated for such operations know the air traffic rules of the countries to be overflown,
including the country of the destination (and alternative) aerodrome. In addition, the
certificate is responsible for ensuring that such pilots are able to conduct all
bilateral communications with foreign air traffic agencies in English and comply with
the language proficiency requirements set out in section 61.10 of RBAC 61. (Wording given
by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
SUBPART X
EMERGENCY MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND TRAINING
<EOS>
121,801 Applicability
certificate holders operating airplanes in the transportation of passengers under this regulation.
provide emergency medical assistance or establish requirements for such.
<EOS>
121,803 Emergency medical equipment
regulation, unless provided with the listed emergency medical equipment
in this section.
maintenance approved by ANAC, to ensure its validity and availability;
themselves;
with a list of your content; and
during the flight, each airplane must carry the following medical equipment on board that comply with
the specifications and requirements of Appendix A of this regulation:
<EOS>
121,805 Crew training for in-flight medical events
airplane model and configuration, each crew member required and type of operation conducted to the extent
appropriate to each crew member and each certificate holder.
when used by the certificate holder;
months.
section, do not require a level of equivalence required of professional medical personnel.
SUBPART Y
ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM
<EOS>
121,901 Purpose and eligibility
Advanced, AQP) to the provisions of RBAC 61, 63, 65, 121, 135 and 142 for qualification, training and
exams, ensuring the competence of its crews, flight dispatchers, instructors,
accredited examiners and the rest of the operating personnel who have to meet the requirements of
training of RBAC 121 and 135.
approved training program as prescribed in 121,401, 135.3 (c) or 135,341.
specified in paragraph 121.909.
<EOS>
121,903 General requirements for AQP.
under RBAC 121 and 135. Each curriculum must specify the manufacturer, model, series
or variant of the plane and each member of the crew or other functions covered by that curriculum.
All crew members, flight instructors, accredited examiners and
other positions such as flight attendants, flight dispatchers and other persons linked to operations.
meet all the requirements of the AQP and this subpart instead of the requirements of RBAC 61, 121 or
135 and RBHA 63 and 65, or the regulations that will replace them. However, each requirement
applicable to the RBACs cited, including, but not limited to, the requirements for
competence, which is not specifically indicated in the FPA, remains applicable to the holder of
certificate and the employees to be trained and qualified by the certificate holder. Nobody
can be trained under an AQP unless it is approved by ANAC and meets all requirements
requirements of the AQP and this regulation.
regulation can use one person and no one can work as a crew member, flight dispatcher,
flight instructor or accredited examiner unless it has satisfactorily performed in a
training program approved under this regulation for a certificate holder, the
training and proficiency assessment required by this AQP for the type of aircraft and function.
form and manner acceptable to ANAC.
in the month before or after the month in which the periodic training should be done, it will be considered as
completed in the reference month. (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
<EOS>
121,907 Definitions
The following definitions apply to this subpart:
available to crew members, including crew members, to achieve a flight
safe and efficient.
function of a crew member. Each Curriculum is composed of several Curriculum Segments and must be
accepted by ANAC.
equivalent under an AQP acceptable to ANAC.
for designated flight tasks prior to any briefing, training or practice of these tasks,
during a training section for a continuing qualification curriculum. The initial assessment
is conducted during an AQP continued qualification cycle to determine trends in
proficiency degradation, if any, due in part to the length of the gap between the sections of
training.
development or modification of qualification standards and associated curriculum content
based on a documented analysis of functional tasks, skills and knowledge required
for job proficiency.
whose content is developed to verify the technical integration and CRM skills.
applicable, which is conducted in a simulation environment of in-line operation using equipment
qualified and approved for this purpose in an AQP.
that is required for a typical student to complete a curriculum segment (including all instruction,
demonstration, practice and evaluation, as appropriate, to achieve proficiency).
applicable parameters, criteria, applicable flight conditions, evaluation strategy, means of
evaluation and applicable documentary references.
qualification standards for an AQP with a prologue that has a detailed description of all
aspects of the evaluation process.
training, assessment, or both.
training in a facility, accepted by ANAC, with facilities for this purpose.
identified by ANAC, are significantly different from those applicable to another airplane in the
same manufacturer, model and series.
<EOS>
121,909 Approval of an AQP
ANAC through the ESEC.
continued qualification (including upgrade, transition and requalification) as specified
in paragraphs 121,911, 121,913, and 121,915 of this regulation. Every AQP curriculum should be
based on a methodology for developing instructional systems. This methodology should
incorporate an in-depth analysis of operations, airplanes, online operations environment and tasks
certificate holder. All qualification and continuing qualification curricula
it must integrate CRM training and assessment and the technical skills and knowledge involved.
An application for approval of an AQP curriculum must be approved if the following requirements are
attended:
derivatives must include the following documentation:
for consolidating information about multiple programs within any of the documents
listed in paragraph (b) (2) of this section;
contained in RBAC 61, 63, 65, 121 or 135, as applicable, which will be met, in order to
equivalent in the AQP curriculum. The certificate holder must establish an initial justification
and a continuous process, approved by ANAC, that demonstrates how the AQP curriculum provides a
equivalent level of operational security for these requirements.
AQP curricula must as part of an application for approval of this program a proposed plan
transition (with a calendar of events) from the approved training program for AQP.
qualifications under an AQP and ANAC verifies that the certificate holder is not meeting the
provisions of its approved AQP, ANAC may require that the certificate holder, in accordance with
as prescribed in paragraph 121.405 (e), review your program. However, ANAC can
revoke AQP approval and require the certificate holder to submit and obtain approval
of a plan (containing a schedule of events) that must be fulfilled in the transition to a
training program under subpart N of this regulation or subpart H of RBAC 135, as
applicable. The certificate holder may also voluntarily submit and obtain approval from
a plan (containing an event schedule) for transition to a training program under
subpart N of this regulation or subpart H of RBAC 135, as applicable.
the justification provided by paragraph (b) (4) of this section and the initial justification and the continued process
to establish a level of operational security in each requirement of RBAC 61, 63, 65, 121 and
135 attended at AQP.
<EOS>
121,911 Indoctrination Curriculum
Each indoctrination curriculum should include the following:
general operational knowledge;
appropriate to the functions to be performed;
instructional theories; knowledge necessary to use the airplane, training devices for
flight, flight simulators and other equipment used in AQP curricula, as appropriate;
crew members, flight dispatchers and other persons involved in the operations, as appropriate;
policies and practices used to conduct types of assessment specific to an AQP.
<EOS>
121,913 Qualification Curriculum
Each qualification curriculum must contain training, assessments and certification activities,
as applicable to each specific function that is listed in the AQP, as follows:
supervised by the certificate holder.
equipment, for the qualification of a person for specific functions, functions related to the
operation of a specific airplane manufacturer, model, series or variant;
skills and qualification standards for each proficiency objective to be achieved through
training and assessments;
in addition to the requirements of RBAC 61, 63, 65, 121 or 135, including any
competency exams.
correction, provisions for special follow-up and as requirements for recent experience will be
fulfilled.
how to operate or how to ensure the safe operation of a specific model and series of aircraft from a
manufacturer in particular;
skills and qualification standards for each procedure and proficiency objective to be
achieved through training and assessments;
recent experience requirements policies.
additionally, the following:
for qualifying a person to assess the performance of people who operate or guarantee
safe operation of a specific model and series of aircraft, by a particular manufacturer;
skills and qualification standards of each procedure and task, to be achieved through
training and assessments;
recent experience requirements policies.
<EOS>
121,915 Continuing qualification curriculum
Each Continuing Qualification Curriculum must contain training and assessment activities, such as
applicable to each specific function that is listed in the AQP, as follows:
each cycle each qualified person under an AQP, including accredited instructors and examiners,
will receive a set of events, subjects, training and assessments that will ensure that each person
maintain proficiency in knowledge, technical skills and required cognitive skills
for initial qualification according to the approved continued qualification of an AQP, strategies
of evaluation and correction and provisions for special follow-ups. Each qualification cycle
continued should include the following:
or more evaluation periods of equal duration. Each qualified person under an AQP must receive
ground and flight training and a competency exam during each assessment period in
appropriate training facilities. The number and frequency of training sessions should
be approved by ANAC;
procedures and matters required in accordance with approved program documentation, such as the
Following:
initial according to the program documentation, approved by ANAC, of ​​the certificate holder;
flight instructors and accredited examiners: ground training including an overhaul of
knowledge and skills covered by qualification training, up-to-date information on
new procedures developed and information on operational safety; (Wording given by
Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
involved in carrying out their tasks in flight: proficiency training on the plane,
flight training, flight simulator or other equipment, as appropriate, in procedures
normal, abnormal and emergency flight maneuvers;
that includes a general review of knowledge and skills in qualification training,
updated information on new procedures developed, information related to safety
operational and, if applicable, an online observation program;
flight training device or type of flight simulator, as appropriate, relating to the operation
training equipment. For accredited instructors and examiners who will conduct your
tasks only on flight simulators or flight training devices: training in
operational flight procedures and maneuvers (normal, abnormal and emergency).
performance through a sample of those most important events identified through
a diagnosis of competences and approved for this purpose by ANAC. The following requirements
evaluation criteria apply:
proficiency, parts that must be conducted in the airplane, flight simulator, or safety device
flight training as approved in the certificate holder's curriculum that must be completed
during each evaluation period; (Wording given by Resolution No. 334, of 7/1/2014)
carrying out their tasks defined in the operations.
competence check conducted on the plane while carrying out operations under RBAC 121
or 135 or during transfer or check flights. A competency check should be
completed in the middle month of the evaluation period; (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
may be used in place of that required by paragraph (b) (2) (i) of this section. The certificate holder
who chooses what is provided for in this paragraph must ensure that competence checks not advised
are manageable and that crew members are not aware of these checks in advance.
In addition, the certificate holder's AQP must ensure that each pilot in command is
checked at least once every 24 months. Minimally, the number of
unannounced competences carried out every one-year period must equal 50% of the number of
pilots in command of the certificate holder according to a strategy approved by ANAC
for this purpose. Finally, the competency checks conducted under this paragraph should
carried out over all geographical areas flown by the certificate holder in accordance with a
sampling approved by ANAC for this purpose; (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
section, each person who works as a pilot in command, second in command or flight mechanic
for that flight must be individually assessed to determine if the person is adequately
trained, proficient in relation to that particular airplane, function, type of operation in which he works;
and that the person has sufficient knowledge and skills to operate effectively as part of the
crew. The person in charge of the assessment must be an INSPAC or accredited examiner and
must have the necessary licenses and skills to act as a pilot in command of that aircraft.
flight dispatchers, flight instructors, accredited examiners and experience stewards
recent approved required, appropriate to function. (Wording given by Resolution nº 334, of
01.07.2014)
an AQP must not exceed the 24-month duration period and must include two or more periods of
evaluations of equal duration. Thereafter, if there is a demonstration by the
certificate that an extension is safe, ANAC can approve an extension of the cycle time
continued qualification up to a maximum of 36 months. (Wording given by Resolution nº
334, of 01.01.2014)
resume that covers the requalification requirements of a crew member, flight dispatcher, other
persons involved in operations, flight instructors or accredited examiners who have not
the qualification was maintained on an ongoing basis.
<EOS>
121,917 Other requirements
In addition to the requirements contained in sections 121,913 and 121,915 of this regulation, each
qualification and continuing curriculum AQP must include the following requirements:
position for which training is provided in the AQP;
under an AQP to use their crew resource management skills or their
technical skills in a real or simulated scenario of operations. For flight crew this
training and assessment must be conducted on an approved flight training device,
flight simulator or, if approved under this regulation, on the aircraft;
certificate holder makes available performance information of its crew, safety instructors
flight and accredited examiners that will allow the certificate holder and ANAC
determine whether the form and content of the training and evaluations are satisfactory and reach all
curriculum objectives.
<EOS>
121,919 Certification
A person subject to an AQP is eligible to receive an airline pilot certificate or
commercial, flight mechanic, flight dispatcher or other appropriate, based on success in
completion of training and assessment achieved under this program if the following requirements are met
achieved:
obey a minimum criteria for certification and classification established by ANAC in the RBAC
61, 63 or 65. ANAC may approve alternatives to the criteria for certification and classification of
RBAC 61, 63 and 65 including practical test requirements if it can be demonstrated that the new criterion
established or requirement represents equivalence or improvement of the trainee's competence,
operational proficiency and operational safety;
piloting), knowledge and skills and knowledge of CRM, knowledge and skills in
scenarios (eg LOE) that test both types of skills;
an AQP under the supervision of a certified flight instructor or examiner and has undergone an LOE
taught by an accredited examiner or INSPAC.
<EOS>
121,921 Training devices and simulators
of the purposes below must be assessed by ANAC to assign the qualification level of the
training device or flight simulator:
a person or crew is ready for a competency assessment;
purposes other than those listed in paragraph (a) of this section must be assessed by ANAC
these purposes.
device for its nomenclature and description of use.
continued program for its availability and reliability to meet its functions approved by the
ANAC.
<EOS>
121,923 Approval of training, qualification, or evaluation by third parties
training, qualification, assessment and certification under an AQP if the following requirements are met
attended:
contracted entity must be provisionally approved by ANAC. The entity
contracted party may provisionally approve the AQP independently or jointly with the holder
of certificate. Provisional approval must be given by ANAC;
certificate holder must be approved by ANAC as prescribed in section 121.909 of this
regulation.
a certificate holder under this paragraph must demonstrate that the following requirements are
attended:
each instructor and accredited examiner;
certificate holder, operating under RBAC 121 or 135, must be adequate in accordance with the
ANAC criteria;
identified for each manufacturer, model, series specific to an airplane (variant), each crew member and
other designated positions.
Provisionally approved training for your AQP must demonstrate that the following requirements are
attended:
meet all qualification and continuing qualification requirements applicable to employees of the
certificate holder, including knowledge of its operations;
AQP of the certificate holder. ANAC can approve or request modifications to ensure that
each curriculum or curriculum segment is applicable to the certificate holder's AQP.
<EOS>
121,925 Record keeping requirements
Each certificate holder who conducts an approved AQP must establish and maintain records with
sufficient detail to demonstrate that you are meeting all the requirements of the AQP and this
subpart.
SUBPART Z
DANGEROUS ITEMS
121.1001 Applicability and definitions
followed by each certificate holder in accordance with the requirements established by the
RBAC No. 175, regardless of whether or not they have operational authorization to transport
dangerous items such as cargo.
Note 1: the operator's responsibilities for the transport of dangerous goods and the requirements
for notification of occurrences with dangerous articles are contained in RBAC nº 175.
Note 2: the relevant requirements for crew members or passengers on the transport of articles
hazardous items such as baggage on board aircraft are contained in RBAC No. 175.
Note 3: the transport of dangerous items other than cargo (eg, aeromedical, search and
rescue etc.) is treated as a general exception of applicability in RBAC nº 175 and in Instruction
Additional. Exceptions for the transport of dangerous goods that are part of the equipment of the
aircraft or used on board the aircraft during the flight are detailed in paragraph
175.11 (a) of RBAC nº 175 and in Supplementary Instruction.
accompanied or lost.
own benefit.
Note: for the purposes of this regulation, COMAT that meets the classification criteria for articles
hazardous substances established by RBAC No. 175 is considered as cargo and must be transported in
accordance with the requirements of that regulation (eg parts of aircraft, such as generators
oxygen chemicals, fuel control units, fire extinguishers, oils,
lubricants, cleaning products).
121.1003 Air operators without operational authorization to transport dangerous goods
as cargo
RBAC No. 175; and
that meet, at a minimum, the applicable requirements of RBAC No. 175, in order to enable its
personal:
as a dangerous article; and
by RBAC No. 175.
121.1005 Operators authorized to transport dangerous items as cargo
prior authorization from ANAC in its Operational Specifications and must:
RBAC No. 175; and
that meet, at a minimum, the applicable requirements of RBAC No. 175, in order to enable its
personal:
COMAT classified as dangerous article;
by RBAC No. 175;
including COMAT classified as a dangerous article, such as cargo on board an aircraft;
dangerous to be transported as cargo; and
in Brazilian territory, as established in a specific rule.
121,1007 Provision of information
The operator must ensure that its personnel involved in the acceptance, handling,
loading and unloading of cargo, including subcontracted employees acting on their behalf
name, be informed of the operator's operational authorization with respect to the transportation of
dangerous articles and their limitations.
SUBPART AA
CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS
<EOS>
121.1101 Purpose and definition
This subpart requires a certificate holder under RBAC 119 to maintain airworthiness
of each plane. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, a review of the
maintenance program, incorporation of project changes and incorporation of revisions to the
instructions for continued airworthiness.
<EOS>
121.1105 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121.1107 Evaluation of pressurized fuselage repairs
600), British Aerospace model BAC 1-11, Boeing model 707, 720, 727, 737, or 747, McDonnell
Douglas model DC-8, DC-9 / MD-80 or DC-10, Fokker model F28, or Lockheed model L-1011
in addition to the applicable number of flight cycles for the implementation specified below, or to date
May 25, 2004, whichever is later, unless guidelines have been developed.
action for evaluating repairs applicable to the surface of the fuselage pressure vessel (coating
fuselage, door lining and souls of the pressure caves) and such lines of action have
incorporated into the maintenance program approved by ANAC. (Wording given by Resolution
nº 334, of 7/1/2014)
It's:
36,000 flights below the window line;
windows.
flight time is 60,000 flights.
15,000 flights.
23,000 flights.
45,000 flights.
60,000 flights.
15,000 flights.
flight time is 30,000 flights.
flight cycles is 60,000 flights.
flight time is 30,000 flights.
is 27,000 flights.
flight cycles is 60,000 flights.
<EOS>
121.1109 Supplementary inspections
transport category airplanes, airplanes with turbine engines with type certificate issued after 1 ° of
January 1958, which, as a result of an original type certificate or subsequent increase in
capacity has:
more or
an airplane under this regulation unless the following requirements are met:
include inspections based on damage tolerances and procedures for structures susceptible to fracture
fatigue that can contribute to catastrophic failure. For the purpose of this section, this
structure will be called "fatigue critical structure";
airplane includes actions to address the adverse effects that repairs, alterations and modifications may have
on the critical fatigue structure and on the inspections required by paragraph (c) (1) of this section. At
actions to deal with these effects in the maintenance program must be approved by ANAC;
required by paragraphs (c) (1) and (c) (2) of this section and any further revision of these changes
must be approved by ANAC.
<EOS>
121.1111 Maintenance program for electrical cabling interconnection systems
transport, turbine-powered aircraft with type certificate issued after January 1, 1958,
which, as a result of an original type certificate or subsequent capacity increase, has:
more; or
in paragraph (a) of this section unless the maintenance program for this aircraft includes inspections and
procedures for EWIS.
EWIS Continued Airworthiness (ICA), which have been developed in accordance with the
provisions of Appendix H of RBAC 25. applicable to each affected aircraft (including those ICA
developed for supplementary type certificates installed on each aircraft) and which have been
approved by ANAC.
to paragraphs H25.5 (a) (1) and (b) of RBAC 25.
paragraphs H25.4 and H25.5 of RBAC 25.
for which an EWIS ICA is developed, the certificate holder must include in the
aircraft maintenance EWIS inspections and procedures based on that ICA.
section and any subsequent EWIS review must be submitted to ANAC for approval.
<EOS>
121.1113 Maintenance program for fuel tanks
transport, with turbine engines and with type certificate issued after January 1, 1958, which,
as a result of an original type certificate or subsequent capacity increase, have:
more; or
of December 15, 2010, the certificate holder must submit to ANAC a proposal for
maintenance instructions for tanks that meet Special Federal Aviation Regulation No. 88
identified in paragraph (a) of this section unless the maintenance program for those planes
has been revised to include the inspections, procedures and limitations applicable to the systems
of fuel tanks.
should be based on the Continued Airworthiness Instructions (ICA) for
fuel tanks that have been developed in accordance with the provisions of SFAR 88 or the
paragraph 25.1529 of RBHA 25 or Appendix H of this same regulation, effective on June 6
2001 (including those developed for auxiliary fuel tanks, if any,
installed in accordance with a supplemental type certificate or other design approvals) and
must be approved by ANAC.
change to a fuel tank with ICA developed under SFAR 88 or under section
25.1529 of the RBHA 25 effective on June 6, 2001, the certificate holder must include in the
aircraft maintenance program inspections and procedures for fuel tank systems
based on those ICA.
in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section and any subsequent revision must be submitted for approval
to ANAC.
<EOS>
121.1115 Validity Limit
any airplane of the transport category propelled by turbine, with maximum gross take-off weight
more than 75,000 pounds (34,020 kg) and a type certificate issued after January 1, 1958,
regardless of whether your maximum gross take-off weight is the result of a type certificate
original or modifications to the subsequent type design. This section also applies to holders
certificate under this RBAC operating any aircraft of the transport category propelled by
turbine with a type certificate issued after January 1, 1958, regardless of its
maximum gross take-off weight, for which the validity limit of the engineering data that
support the structural maintenance program (hereinafter referred to as LOV) is required in accordance with
with section 26.21 of RBAC 26 or 25,571 of RBAC 25 after March 8, 2013.
identified in paragraph (a) of this section after the applicable date identified in Table 1 of this section a
unless an Airworthiness Limitations Section approved in accordance with Annex H of the
RBAC 25 or in accordance with section 26.21 of RBAC 26 is incorporated into its
maintenance. The Airworthiness Limitations Section must:
RBAC 26, as applicable, except as provided for in paragraph (f) of this section; and
under this RBAC can operate an airplane identified in paragraph 26.21 (g) of RBAC 26 after 8
September 2015, unless an Airworthiness Limitations section, approved in accordance with
according to Annex H of RBAC 25 or according to section 26.21 of RBAC 26, be included in
your maintenance program. The Airworthiness Limitations Section must:
RBAC 26, as applicable, except as provided for in paragraph (f) of this section; and
an airplane in addition to the LOV, or the extended LOV, specified in paragraphs (b) (1), (c), (d), or (f)
of this section, as applicable, unless the following conditions are met:
Airworthiness that:
susceptible to generalized fatigue damage (WFD) approved in accordance with section 26.23 of the RBAC
26; and
generalized by fatigue are clearly noticeable in the program.
revision of the maintenance program required by paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this section to ANAC
for review and approval.
applicable compliance date specified in paragraph (c) or Table 1 of this section, rather than
include an approved LOV in the Airworthiness Limitations Section, the operator must include
in the Airworthiness Limitations Section the applicable standard LOV specified in Table 1 or
Table 2 of this section, as applicable.
Table 1 - Aircraft subject to section 26.21 of RBAC 26
Default LOV date:
greeting:
Airplane model Flight cycles
Months after - FC) or flight hours
3/8/2013 (flight hours - FH)
Airbus - Only existing models
A300 B2-1A, B2-1C, B2K-3C, B2-203 30 48,000 FC
A300 B4-2C, B4-103 30 40,000 FC
A300 B4-203 30 34,000 FC
Series A300-600 60 30,000 FC / 67,500 FH
A310-200 60 Series 40,000 FC / 60,000 FH
Series A310-300 60 35,000 FC / 60,000 FH
A318 Series 60 48,000 FC / 60,000 FH
A319 Series 60 48,000 FC / 60,000 FH
A320-100 60 60 48,000 FC / 48,000 FH series
Series A320-200 60 48,000 FC / 60,000 FH
Series A321 60 48,000 FC / 60,000 FH
Series A330-200, -300 (except family WV050) 60 40,000 FC / 60,000 FH
A330-200 series, -300 family WV050 60 33,000 FC / 100,000 FH
A330-200 Freighter 60 Series NOTE
Series A340-200, -300 (except families WV027 60 20,000 FC / 80,000 FH
and WV050) (not Enhanced)
A340-200 series, -300 family WV027 (not 60 30,000 FC / 60,000 FH
Enhanced)
Series A340-300 family WV050 (Enhanced) 60 20,000 FC / 100,000 FH
A340-500 series, -600 60 16,600 FC / 100,000 FH
Default LOV date:
greeting:
Airplane model Flight cycles
Months after - FC) or flight hours
3/8/2013 (flight hours - FH)
A380-800 Series 72 NOTE
Boeing - Existing models only
717 60 60,000 FC / 60,000 FH
727 (all series) 30 60,000 FC
737 (classic): 737-100, -200, -200C, - 30 75,000 FC
300, -400, -500
737 (NG): 737-600, -700, -700C, -800, -900, 60 75,000 FC
747 (classics): 747-100, -100B, -100B SUD, 30 20,000 FC
747-400: 747-400, -400D, -400F 60 20,000 FC
757 60 50,000 FC
767 60 50,000 FC
777-200, -300 60 40,000 FC
777-200LR, -300ER 72 40,000 FC
777F 72 11,000 FC
Bombardier - Existing models only
CL-600: 2D15 (Regional Jets Series 705),
2D24 (Regional Jets 900 Series) 72 60,000 FC
Embraer - Only existing models
ERJ 170 72 NOTE
ERJ 190 72 NOTE
Fokker - Existing models only
F.28 Mark 0070, Mark 0100 30 90,000 FC
Lockheed - Existing models only
L-1011 30 36,000 FC
188 30 26,600 FC
382 (all series) 30 20,000 FC / 50,000 FH
McDonnell Douglas - Models only
existing
DC-8, -8F 30 50,000 FC / 50,000 FH
DC-9 (except MD-80 models) 30 100,000 FC / 100,000 FH
Default LOV date:
greeting:
Airplane model Flight cycles
Months after - FC) or flight hours
3/8/2013 (flight hours - FH)
MD-80 (DC-9-81, -82, -83, -87, MD-88) 30 50,000 FC / 50,000 FH
MD-90 60 60,000 FC / 90,000 FH
DC-10-10, -15 30 42,000 FC / 60,000 FH
DC-10-30, -40, -10F, -30F, -40F 30 30,000 FC / 60,000 FH
MD-10-10F 60 42,000 FC / 60,000FH
MD-10-30F 60 30,000 FC / 60,000 FH
MD-11, MD-11F 60 20,000 FC / 60,000 FH
Maximum takeoff weight modifications 30, or 12 months Not applicable
gross after approval
All airplanes whose maximum weight to operate the aircraft,
gross takeoff has been reduced to 75,000 whichever occurs
pounds (34,020 kg) or less after May 7 of last
2013, or increased to more than £ 75,000
on any date, by an amendment to
Type Certificate or a Certificate
Supplemental Type
All other airplane models (72, or 12 month certified) Not applicable
type or amendments to type certificates) not after approval
listed in table 2 of the LOV, or before
to operate the plane,
what happens for
last
NOTE: The operating limitations of the aircraft are set out in the Flight Limitations Section
Airworthiness.
Table 2 - Aircraft excluded from section 26.21 of RBAC 26
Standard LOV:
Airplane model Flight cycles
Airbus
Caravelle 15,000 FC / 24,000 FH
Avions Marcel Dassault
Breguet Aviation Mercure 100C 20,000 FC / 16,000 FH
Boeing
Boeing 707 (Series -100 and Series -200) 20,000 FC
Boeing 707 (Series -300 and Series -400) 20,000 FC
Boeing 720 30,000 FC
Bombardier
CL-44D4 and CL-44J 20,000 FC
BD-700 15,000 FH
Bristol Airplane Company
Britannia 305 10,000 FC
British Aerospace Airbus, Ltd.
BAC 1-11 (all models) 85,000 FC
British Aerospace (Commercial Aircraft) Ltd.
Armstrong Whitworth Argosy A.W. 650 Series 101
20,000 FC
BAE Systems (Operations) Ltd.
BAe 146-100A (all models) 50,000 FC
BAe 146-200-07 50,000 FC
BAe 146-200-07 Dev 50,000 FC
BAe 146-200-11 50,000 FC
BAe 146-200-07A 47,000 FC
BAe 146-200-11 Dev 43,000 FC
BAe 146-300 (all models) 40,000 FC
Avro 146-RJ70A (all models) 40,000 FC
Avro 146-RJ85A and 146-RJ100A (all models) 50,000 FC
Standard LOV:
Airplane model Flight cycles
D & R Nevada, LLC
Convair Model 22 1,000 FC / 1,000 FH
Convair Model 23M 1,000 FC / 1,000 FH
deHavilland Aircraft Company, Ltd.
D.H. Comet 4C 8,000 FH
Gulfstream
SGS 40,000 FH
GV-SP 40,000 FH
Ilyushin Aviation Complex
IL-96T 10,000 FC / 30,000 FH
Lockheed
300-50A01 (USAF C 141A) 20,000 FC
Union Official of March 8, 2013, Section 1, page 7)
<EOS>
121.1117 Flammability reduction means
transport category airplanes, with turbine engines and with type certificate issued after January 1
1958, which, as a result of an original type certificate or subsequent increase in capacity,
you have:
more; or
certificate can operate an airplane identified in table 1 of this section (including cargo planes)
for which the manufacturer's State has issued an airworthiness certificate or certificate
of airworthiness for export after June 5, 2011, unless Mitigation Means
Ignition (IMM) or Flammability Reduction Means (FRM) meet the requirements of section
26.33 of RBAC 26.
Table 1
Model-Boeing Model-Airbus
747 Series A318, A319, A320, A321 Series
737 Series A330, A340 Series
777 Series
767 Series
no certificate holder may operate an airplane subject to section 26.33 of RBAC 26 that has
an auxiliary fuel tank installed in accordance with a field approval, unless
the following requirements are met:
in this section;
applicable, approved by ANAC;
operational.
specified in paragraph (e) of this section, no certificate holder may operate an airplane for
which this section applies unless the requirements of paragraphs (d) (1) and (d) (2) of this section
are met.
approved by ANAC, are installed on the dates specified in paragraph (e) of this section.
applicable, are operational.
required by paragraph (d) of this section must be met by the dates specified in the
paragraphs (e) (1), (e) (2) or (e) (3) of this section:
be modified by September 19, 2016;
must be modified by September 19, 2019;
Table 1 of this section, the aircraft must be modified by September 19, 2019.
Regulation, no certificate holder may:
paragraph (e) of this section unless they are operational; or
that comply with paragraph (d) of this section.
whose airworthiness limitations have been approved by ANAC in accordance with sections
26.33, 26.35 or 26.37 of RBAC 26, after modifying the airplane in accordance with paragraph (d) of this
section, unless the maintenance program for that aircraft is revised to include the
applicable airworthiness limitations.
before returning to service of the aircraft, after any change in which the limitations of
airworthiness required by section 25,981 of RBAC 25 and section 26.33 or 26.37 of RBAC
26, the certificate holder should review the aircraft maintenance program to include the
airworthiness limitations.
must be submitted to ANAC for approval.
freighters, but these planes are subject to paragraph (f) of this section.
one year, provided that:
certificate notifies ANAC that it intends to adopt this paragraph;
Operational as provided for in section 119.51 of RBAC 119 and review the required manual at
121,133 of this regulation to include a requirement for the planes specified in Table 2 of this
section, for the use of the air conditioning system on the ground for times longer than 30 minutes, when
available and operational on the ground, whenever the ambient temperature is above 15 degrees Celsius;
and
described in paragraph (k) (2) of this section on each airplane subject to extension.
Table 2
Model-Boeing Model-Airbus
747 Series A318, A319, A320, A321 Series
737 Series A300, A310 Series
777 Series A330, A340 Series
767 Series
757 Series
compliance with the dates specified in paragraph (e) of this section may be extended by a
year, provided that the certificate holder meets the requirements of paragraph (k) (2) of this section when
the operating specifications are issued and then use the air conditioning systems in the
ground as described in paragraph (k) (2) of this section on each airplane subject to this extension.
100% of the affected fleet, no certificate holder can operate in the transport of passengers
any of the models specified in Table 2 of this section unless the aircraft has been
modified in accordance with paragraph 26.33 (c) of RBAC 26.
auxiliary is installed after September 19, 2019, unless ANAC has certified the
tank in accordance with section 25,981 of RBAC 25 in effect on December 26, 2008.
SUBPART BB
OPERATIONAL SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM - SGSO
<EOS>
121.1205 Definitions and concepts
operational security that already exist in the certificate holder's organization, prior to the
implementation of the SGSO, compared to those necessary for the operation of the SGSO.
ground occurrences, abnormal occurrences or any risky situation that has the potential to
cause damage or injury or threaten the viability of the operation of a certificate holder. The only
The purpose of occurrence reporting is to enable the identification of hazards and to manage risks
arising, and not to define the culprits.
identification of hazards, carrying out analysis of the consequences of hazards, risk assessment
arising, proposition of risk mitigation or hazard elimination actions and assessment of
effectiveness of the actions proposed by a certificate holder. The identification, evaluation, elimination
of the danger and / or mitigation of the risks that threaten the operational safety related to the operations
certificate holder.
performance of a certificate holder's SGSO in terms of operational security risk in the
carrying out its activities, which must be guaranteed by the top management of a certificate holder
and accepted by ANAC. The Acceptable Level of Operational Safety Performance (NADSO) of
each certificate holder must be expressed through Safety Performance Indicators
Operational Security (IDSO), Operational Security Performance Goals (MDSO) and Security
Operational Security (ReqSO). The established values ​​must take into account the
complexity and the operational context of each certificate holder and their ability to assess
operational security risks
measurable, short-term measures that reflect the operational safety performance of the SGSO of a
certificate holder. These are values ​​expressed for the parameters that characterize and / or typify the
performance of its activities, regarding the level of performance of operational safety, as agreed
with ANAC.
long-term measures that reflect the operational safety performance of an OSS. Are values
concrete to be achieved by a certificate holder in relation to performance levels
operational security agreed with ANAC. A certificate holder's MDSO
comprises one or more operational safety performance indicators, together with the
desired results, expressed in terms of these indicators, and must be accepted by ANAC.
property (equipment or structures), loss of personnel or reduced ability to perform
a given function.
materialize the MDSO established by the certificate holder and agreed with ANAC.
severity, taking as reference the worst possible condition.
through an ongoing process of hazard identification and risk management.
<EOS>
121.1221 General requirements
PSOE-ANAC, must develop, implement and maintain an SGSO that meets the requirements of this
subpart.
an SGSO deployed and operating as set out in this subpart. (Wording given by
Resolution No. 468, of May 4, 2018)
components and elements:
121.1225 of this regulation), which contains the following elements:
121.1227 of this regulation), which contains the following elements:
Regulation), which contains the following elements:
Regulation), which contains the following elements:
complexity of the certificate holder's operations.
<EOS>
121.1223 [Reserved]
<EOS>
121.1225 Component “Operational security policy and objectives”
certificate, containing:
operational security policy;
certificate holder and include the circumstances under which disciplinary actions will not apply;
the organization;
appropriate to the certificate holder.
considering:
operational security, including:
analysis of the data below, aiming at monitoring the NADSO:
aspects:
final responsibility on behalf of the certificate holder for implementation, operation and
maintenance of the SGSO;
direct responsibility for operational safety on the part of strategic managers;
as the certificate holder’s staff with respect to the operational security performance of the
SGSO;
in the organization;
tolerability of the risk to operational safety;
aircraft that results in the activation of its PRE; and
RBAC or in regulation affects its activities.
following aspects:
necessary for the implementation, operation and maintenance of a SGSO proportional to the size,
nature and complexity of its operation;
relevant to RBAC 119 and which will have the following responsibilities:
improvement proposal;
certificate;
operational status of the certificate holder;
related to the operational security of the certificate holder.
SGSO documentation;
SGSO documentation; and
implementation, including those that allow:
where it operates.
implementation of the PRE;
certificate; and
with the requirements of section 121.135;
operational mentioned in paragraphs (a) (4) and (a) (5) of this section, allowing its traceability;
operation of the certificate holder.
<EOS>
121.1227 “Operational security risk management” component
consequences, considering formal means of acquiring operational safety data in
relation to:
aeronautical accidents / incidents, personnel qualified by SIPAER or with
any other equivalent qualification recognized by ANAC); and
criteria presented in paragraph (b) (1) of this section; and
keep in the tolerable or tolerable region with mitigation, according to the proposal presented.
<EOS>
121.1229 Component “guarantee of operational safety”
include the following aspects:
in accordance with paragraph 121.1225 (a) (3); and
pursuant to paragraph 121.1227 (b) (2);
certificate in relation to that established in paragraph 121.1225 (a) (3), conducting a management
of operational security risks, according to section 121.1227, aiming at the reestablishment of NADSO
accepted by ANAC;
a formal process for:
activities related to the certificate holder's operational security;
before implementing changes; and
pursuant to paragraph 121.1227 (b) (2), which are not effective due to changes in the environment
operational.
MDSO and the NADSO-related ReqSOs accepted by ANAC, of ​​the activities of the
certificate;
IDSO, MDSO and ReqSO compatible with the evolution of the holder's operational environment
certificate;
operationality and effectiveness of the certificate holder's SGSO;
certificate and all personnel involved in its operations so that:
<EOS>
121.1231 “Promoting operational safety” component
related to the implementation and operation of the SGSO ensuring that the certificate holder's personnel
is suitably qualified according to his / her function provided for in that System;
covers the entire organization and defines the target audience, the content and the workload of each course, in
proportional to the complexity of the activities performed by the professionals involved;
is developed by personnel with a capacity recognized by the DSO or GSO;
suitable solo and qualified instructors. The responsible manager has ultimate responsibility for
quality of the courses taught and the training of its staff, even if they hire
outsourced organizations to develop and / or administer the entire program or part of it.
strategic include:
tactical and operational has a biennial validity and includes:
considering the certificate holder's operational security policy and objectives.
aspects:
operational security aspects of the certificate holder, so that they can:
operational; and
operational safety, which may include operational bulletins, circulars, publications, studies,
surveys, electronic messages, internet, intranet or other formal means that the holder of
certificate has.
SUBPART CC
<EOS>
